The [Budapest Open Access 
Declaration](http://www.budapestopenaccessinitiative.org/read), the 
founding document of the open access movement, begins with a 
manifesto-like flourish: "An old tradition and a new technology have 
converged to make possible an unprecedented public good." The 
Declaration, released in 2002, cited scholars’ longstanding practice of 
writing for free--that’s the old tradition. The new technology was, of 
course, the internet. And open access (OA) scholarship is what they, 
together, made possible: "the world-wide electronic distribution of the 
peer-reviewed journal literature" for free. 

There’s another old tradition that, so far, has remained true to its 
tolled, print-bound origins: the course reader. "Schoolbook" 
compilations were, as Leah Price has documented, a derivative of the 
literary anthology--a collection of often-abridged works of poetry or 
literature. Books like Vicesimus Knox’s 1783 *Elegant 
Extracts*--addressed to "school-boys"--flooded the English market in the 
late 18th century.<span class="footnote-wrapper" tabindex="-1"><span 
class="count-wrapper"><sup>1</sup></span></span> The first American 
schoolbook "reader" was Noah Webster’s 1785 *Grammatical Institute of 
the English Language*, a miscellany of textual extracts intended to help 
students learn to read--hence the term "reader."<span 
class="footnote-wrapper" tabindex="-1"><span 
class="count-wrapper"><sup>2</sup></span></span> By the turn of the 
century Lindley Murray’s *English Reader* appeared and spread in 
popularity--and the form was more or less fixed.<span 
class="footnote-wrapper" tabindex="-1"><span 
class="count-wrapper"><sup>3</sup></span></span> Tens of millions of 
competing readers were sold to schools throughout the 19th century. But 
a different sort of teaching anthology, centered on specific subjects, 
broke free from reading instruction in the second half of the 19th 
century.<span class="footnote-wrapper" tabindex="-1"><span 
class="count-wrapper"><sup>4</sup></span></span> The new purpose was to 
gather together and arrange excerpts as a textual companion to topical 
teaching, especially at the college level. A course in English 
literature, for example, might require a "reader" for its literary 
examples--conveniently packaged and thoughtfully juxtaposed excerpts 
meant to support the professor’s lectures. *The Norton Anthology of 
English Literature*, and the late 20th-century Xeroxed course-pack, are 
the descendants--if not quite spiritual heirs--of Noah Webster’s 18th 
century grammar primer. 

*Social Media & the Self* is intended to serve students enrolled in 
media and communication courses. It’s at least notable that the 
discipline’s first textbooks weren’t, in fact, textbooks at all. Wilbur 
Schramm, the English-trained scholar who helped establish communication 
research in the U.S., cobbled together fifteen papers into the field’s 
first reader, *Communications in Modern Society* (1948).<span 
class="footnote-wrapper" tabindex="-1"><span 
class="count-wrapper"><sup>5</sup></span></span> The next year Schramm 
published a sprawling successor collection, *Mass Communications*, with 
nearly 40 chapters: "There has not appeared, however, and probably will 
not for some time appear, any integrated introduction to mass 
communications... This volume has been designed to meet part of the need 
for such an introduction."<span class="footnote-wrapper" 
tabindex="-1"><span class="count-wrapper"><sup>6</sup></span></span> 
Since then, and across updated additions and countless new entrants, the 
*reader* has played an outsized role in the upstart bundle of fields 
that study media--a concession, perhaps, to these fields’ polyglot 
spread. But the course-reader format has advantages over its textbook 
rival: The multiplicity of voices, yes, but also the substitution of 
genuine scholarship for the textbook’s forced dilutions. 

But the typical course reader, 70 years after Schramm’s first attempt, 
is often *more* costly than the notoriously pricey textbook, thanks to 
copyright payouts. So, for example, Laurie Ouellette’s *Media Studies 
Reader* sells for $57. 



------------------------------------------------------------------------ 



So this volume is a variation on an old theme: It’s an *open access 
reader* (OAR)--*a collection of open-access works selected and ordered 
with university courses in mind*. Each of its component works--articles, 
mainly, but also multimedia artifacts--already carries an open access 
license. And the original bits, like the introduction and the curation 
itself, are also openly licensed. 

The open access reader, as a format, is a subset of a larger class of 
open materials centered on teaching and learning, often called *open 
educational resources* (OER). The prototypical OER is the open 
*textbook*; the open access *reader* is its anthologized counterpart. 
The reader form is distinguished by its compilation of found 
items--pre-existing publications and works. The open access reader has a 
number of advantages over its closed, print or paywalled predecessor. 
The most obvious is that the OAR is **free** to faculty and students, 
set against the often-usurious price for the tolled reader. But the fact 
is that many faculty have, for years, posted PDFs on Blackboard or 
Canvas for their students; those downloads are free too, if not exactly 
legal. Likewise, many academic libraries bundle digital course 
"reserves" at an instructor’s direction, then wade through the legal 
thicket of copyright and fair use. The resulting course-specific article 
collection is, typically, free to enrolled students for "check out." So 
these options are costless too, at least to students. 

What the OAR offers over Blackboard piracy and the librarian’s e-reserve 
option is **universal access**. The OA reader is freely available on the 
web, not locked behind an LMS password. The open access reader has its 
own unique identifiers--the 
[ISBN](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Standard_Book_Number "International Standard Book Number") 
and 
[DOI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_object_identifier "Digital Object Identifier")--a 
stable url, and listings in library catalogs and other directories. It’s 
discoverable, in other words: unfenced by cost or course-specific 
lockdown. 

The open access reader is also an invitation to **iterate**. With a 
proper open-access license (like the [Creative Commons BY 
4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ "Attribution 4.0 International")), 
readers like *Social Media & the Self* can be modified, rethought on 
different principles, or even dismantled for parts. The whole point of a 
["free cultural 
work"](https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/public-domain/freeworks "Understanding Free Cultural Works") 
is to encourage remix and mash up. It’s true that OA readers are a drop 
in the free-culture ocean, and that they’re limited by their constituent 
chapters’ licenses (which, in some cases, may restrict the scope of 
reuse). But OA anthologies contribute, nevertheless, to the 
free-and-open share of humanity’s cultural stock. 

The OA reader’s invitation to iterate is extended to the original 
creator, too. These collections’ light, digital footprint--on PubPub or 
other platforms--makes it easy to **update**, to roll out new versions. 
The legacy course reader could also be updated, by way of a published 
"second edition," for example, or by a professor’s semester-to-semester 
course-pack revision. But OA readers afford cumulative and ongoing 
iteration, tracked by a versioning system modeled on software updates; 
there’s no need to wait for the punctuated overhaul of the old "edition" 
approach. Tweaks, like typo or formatting corrections, are a few 
keystrokes away. A new idea--like the embedding of interactive 
assignments--can be rolled out in a stepwise fashion. Fresh outbound 
links, and newly published works, can be swapped out as they reveal 
themselves online. 

Yet another advantage of the OA reader is its ability to host a running 
**commentary**. *Social Media & the Self* is built on PubPub, which 
includes its own public-annotation feature. Most other platforms are, or 
will be, capable of hosting conversations too, at the very least through 
the web-annotation tool 
[Hypothesis](https://web.hypothes.is/ "Hypothesis"). The resulting 
marginalia is public by default, enabling not just reaction to the main 
text but also back-and-forth among the comments. The OAR article wins a 
new, layered life, one that resembles post-publication peer review but 
set in conversational exchange. A U.S. college students might reply to 
an annotation by a South African scholar, itself a response to the 
original author’s clarification to a Chinese undergrad’s query. There’s 
a Talmudic promise to the OAR with, however, space in its margins for 
the uncredentialed. 

The OAR, finally, is another platform for the open access scholarship 
otherwise anchored to journals. When a researchers opts for OA, she may 
pay a prestige penalty: Most fields’ flagship journals are suspended in 
tolled-access amber. There’s lots of evidence that OA articles--out from 
behind the pay well--get read and cited more nevertheless. But the OAR is 
another way to boost these scholars’ visibility, to reward the good but 
unnerving choice to publish open-access. The open access reader, in 
short, is an amplification device for the deserving. 



------------------------------------------------------------------------ 



In its 250-year history, the course reader form has adapted to shifts in 
technology and law. The reader is an old tradition, and new technologies 
keep changing its shape. The Internet-enabled open access movement is 
only the latest perturbation, with the potential to ventilate the genre. 
It’s fitting that the original "schoolbook" readers emerged, in England 
at least, after perpetual copyright was snuffed out by the House of 
Lords in 1774.<span class="footnote-wrapper" tabindex="-1"><span 
class="count-wrapper"><sup>7</sup></span></span> That decision 
established what we now call the public domain, and gave rein to 
anthologized reproduction. So the open access reader is a return to the 
form’s roots. 



------------------------------------------------------------------------ 

1. <span class="count">1.</span><span 
class="rendered-footnote unstructured-value"></span> 

Leah Price, *The Anthology and the Rise of the Novel: From 
Richardson to George Eliot* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2003), 3, 67, 71. Charles Carpenter, in his history of the American 
textbook, identifies a 1776 German book, *Der Kinderfreund*, as the 
first "reader" in the relevant sense. Carpenter, *History of 
American Schoolbooks* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1963), 57. 

<span class="rendered-footnote structured-value"></span> 

2. <span class="count">2.</span><span 
class="rendered-footnote unstructured-value"></span> 

Ibid., p. 58. 

<span class="rendered-footnote structured-value"></span> 

3. <span class="count">3.</span><span 
class="rendered-footnote unstructured-value"></span> 

Ibid., pp. 62–63. 

<span class="rendered-footnote structured-value"></span> 

4. <span class="count">4.</span><span 
class="rendered-footnote unstructured-value"></span> 

Ibid., pp. 162–165. 

<span class="rendered-footnote structured-value"></span> 

5. <span class="count">5.</span><span 
class="rendered-footnote unstructured-value"></span> 

Wilbur Schramm, ed., *Communications in Modern Society* (Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 1948). 

<span class="rendered-footnote structured-value"></span> 

6. <span class="count">6.</span><span 
class="rendered-footnote unstructured-value"></span> 

Wilbur Schramm, ed., *Mass Communications* (Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 1949), vii. 

<span class="rendered-footnote structured-value"></span> 

7. <span class="count">7.</span><span 
class="rendered-footnote unstructured-value"></span> 

Price, *The Anthology*, 3–4. 

<span class="rendered-footnote structured-value"></span> 



*Image credit: Cover page of Vicesimus Knox,* [Elegant 
Extracts](https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/008665014) *(1783)* 