<sup>*Excerpt\ from\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934:\ iii–x.*</sup>

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/hopww92l/01564535596666.png)

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

OUR MASTER’S VOICE
==================

ADVERTISING
===========

  

*BY JAMES RORTY*

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

THE JOHN DAY COMPANY

New York

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

COPYRIGHT, **1934**, BY JAMES RORTY

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

FOR THE JOHN DAY COMPANY, INC.

BY H. WOLFF, NEW YORK

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

*Dedicated to the memory of Thorstein Veblen, and to those technicians
of the word whose “conscientious withdrawal of efficiency” may yet
accomplish that burial of the ad-man’s pseudoculture which this book
contemplates with equanimity.*

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
----------------

  

JAMES RORTY was born March 30, 1890 in Middletown, New York. He was
educated in the public schools, served an early journalistic
apprenticeship on a daily newspaper in Middletown, and was graduated
from Tufts College. Mr. Rorty was a copy-writer for an advertising
agency from 1913 to 1917, at which time he enlisted as a stretcher
bearer in the United States Army Ambulance Service. He was awarded the
Distinguished Service Cross for service in the Argonne offensive.

Since the war Mr. Rorty has worked variously as an advertising
copy-writer, publicity man, newspaper and magazine free lance. He is the
author of two books of verse, “What Michael Said to the Census Taker”
and "Children of the Sun”, and has contributed to the *Nation*, *New
Republic*, *New Masses*, *Freeman*, *New Freeman*, and *Harpers.*

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

CONTENTS
--------

  

[PREFACE](https://msp.pubpub.org/pub/xp7ki13t) *to the
mediastudies.press edition*

INTRODUCTION *to the mediastudies.press edition*

PREFACE: *I was an Ad-man Once*

1 THE BUSINESS NOBODY KNOWS

2 THE APPARATUS OF ADVERTISING

3 HOW IT WORKS: *The Endless Chain of Salesmanship*

4 PRIMROSE CHEESE: *An Advertising Accouchement*

5 AS ADVERTISED: *The Product of Advertising*

6 THE MAGAZINES

I. *The Command to Buy*  
 II. *Chromium is More Expensive*  
 III. *The Ad-man’s Pseudoculture*

7 THE NATURAL HISTORY OF ADVERTISING

8 THE THREE GRACES: *Advertising, Propaganda, Education*

9 TRUTH IN ADVERTISING

10 CHAIN MUSIC: *The Truth About the Shavers*

11 BEAUTY AND THE AD-MAN

12 SACRED AND PROFANE LOVE

13 SCIENCE SAYS: *Come up and see me some time*

14 WHOSE SOCIAL SCIENTIST ARE YOU?

15 PSYCHOLOGY ASKS: *How am I doing?*

16 THE MOVIES

17 RULE BY RADIO

18 RELIGION AND THE AD-MAN

19 EVOLUTION OF THE AMERICAN HERO

20 THE CARPENTER RE-CARPENTERED

21 A GALLERY OF PORTRAITS

22 GÖTTERDÄMMERUNG: *Advertising and the Depression*

23 NIRA—THE AD-MAN ON THE JOB

24 ALL FOR PURITY

25 CALL FOR MR. THROTTLEBOTTOM

26 CONCLUSION: *Problems and Prospects*

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

FOREWORD
--------

  

TWO BASIC definitions will perhaps assist the reader to understand the
scope and intent of this book.<span class="footnote-wrapper"
tabindex="-1"><span class="count-wrapper"><sup>1</sup></span></span>

The *advertising business* is taken to mean the total apparatus of
newspaper and magazine publishing in America, plus radio broadcasting,
and with important qualifications the movies; plus the advertising
agency structure, car card, poster, and direct-by-mail companies, plus
the services of supply: printing, lithography, engraving, etc. which are
largely dependent upon the advertising business for their existence.

The *advertising technique* is taken to mean the technique of
manufacturing customers by producing systematized illusions of value or
desirability in the minds of the particular public at which the
technique is directed.

The book is an attempt, by an advertising man and journalist, to tell
how and why the traditional conception and function of journalism has
lapsed in this country. It describes the progressive seizure and use, by
business, of the apparatus of social communication in America.
Naturally, this story has not been “covered”, has not been considered
fit to print, in any newspaper or magazine dependent for its existence
upon advertising.

In attempting to examine the phenomenon of American advertising in the
context of the culture it became necessary to examine the culture itself
and even to trace its economic and ideological origins. This enlargement
of scope necessitated a somewhat cursory and inadequate treatment of
many detailed aspects of the subject. The writer accepted this
limitation, feeling that what was chiefly important was to establish, if
possible, the essential structure and functioning of the phenomena.

Since the book is presented not as sociology, but as journalism, the
writer felt free to use satirical and even fictional literary techniques
for whatever they might yield in the way of understanding and emphasis.
The writer wishes to acknowledge gratefully the help and encouragement
he has received from many friends in and out of the advertising
business. The section on “The Magazines” is almost wholly the work of
Winifred Raushenbush and Hal Swanson. Thanks are due to Professor Robert
Lynd for reading portions of the manuscript and for many stimulating
suggestions; to Professor Sidney Hook for permission to quote from
unpublished manuscripts; to F. J. Schlink and his associates on the
staff of Consumers’ Research for permission to use certain data; to
Stuart Chase for much useful counsel and encouragement; to Dr. Meyer
Schapiro for valuable criticisms of the manuscript and to Elliot E.
Cohen for help in revising the proofs; to the officials of the Food and
Drug Administrations for courteously and conscientiously answering
questions.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

1.  <span class="count">1.</span><span
    class="rendered-footnote unstructured-value"></span>

    \[Clarifying footnotes from the reprint editor, Jefferson Pooley,
    will appear in brackets, followed by *“—Ed*.”\]

    <span class="rendered-footnote structured-value"></span>

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<sup>*Excerpt\ from\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934:\ iii–x.*</sup>
