<sup>*Eighth\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/12-rorty-1934-chapter-eight-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/12-rorty-1934-chapter-eight-original.pdf)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER 8
=========

*THE THREE GRACES: Advertising, Propaganda, Education*
------------------------------------------------------

MODERN advertising reaches its highest expression in the United States
and under the political and social forms of our democratic institutions
and concepts: a free press, popular education, representative
government. It is important to note that the contemporary phenomenon is
an aspect of our socalled “surplus economy,” as is revealed by the use
of the phrase “sales resistance” in current advertising parlance. “Sales
resistance” means an impedance of the distributive function. It implies
a lack of spontaneous demand for the product or service which may be
caused,

1.  By the inferiority of the product as to quality or price with
    respect to competing products.

2.  By the inertia of established buying patterns in the market at which
    the product is aimed.

3.  By the inter-industrial competition, as for example, brick against
    lumber or meat against cheese.

4.  By the inadequacy of the class or mass buying power with respect to
    the volume and price of commodities and services offered on the
    market.

Although existing buying power is ultimately determinative, it is
possible to manipulate consumer preferences and the division of the
consumer's dollar within this iron limit. In other words the market can
be “educated”—or propagandized—as you choose to put it, just as it can
be partially or wholly monopolized and the controls established with
respect to volume of production, distribution and price. These are,
perhaps, the two major factors in the obsolescence of the “law” of
supply and demand.

The education, or manipulation of the market may proceed directly
through the advertising of the product by the manufacturer or by a group
of manufacturers organized as a trade association; through unsigned
publicity prepared and issued by the manufacturer or his agent; through
the more or less influenced or coerced “co-operation” of the daily or
periodical press, radio and cinema; even through similar influences or
coercions focused upon our institutions of formal education. Sometimes
all four methods are used. A few typical examples will illustrate the
nature of the process, its detailed exposition being left for other
chapters.

It happens that a single manufacturer dominates the market for
automobile tire valves, caps and gauges. He stands to profit, therefore,
by any expansion of this market. Hence his advertising has tended to be
primarily “educational”; that is to say, it tells motorists that proper
inflation adds to the durability of tires, that improper inflation is
dangerous; that the air pressure in tires should be frequently tested,
hence the motorist should own his own gauge; that the valves require
more or less frequent replacement.

Note that all this “education” is sound enough on the whole and in the
consumer's interest as well as that of the manufacturer and distributor.
Such education, or promotion, can be achieved more economically, on the
whole, by publicity than by advertising, since the publicizing of the
manufacturer's name and the brand name of his product, is, while
desirable in view of actual or latent competition, not essential.

Many newspapers and magazines carry columns of advice to motorists; the
editors of these automobile sections and pages can readily be persuaded
to publish small items urging motorists to keep the tires of their cars
properly inflated; especially if the manufacturer or his agent does the
whole column in which the advice about tires is mixed with other
standard bits of information and warning. This relieves the newspaper or
magazine staff of labor and expenditure; sometimes a staff member, or a
journalist having working relations with several publications, is
induced to do the job for a fee paid by the manufacturer, and then see
that the “education” or promotion is duly published. *But* such
arrangements are precarious unless the newspaper or magazine gets some
quid pro quo. Hence an educational publicity campaign of this kind is
usually correlated with a minimum expenditure for paid advertising.

There is nothing unusual about such procedures, nor is any violation of
the current business code involved. True, the technique requires the
application of interested economic pressures. But so does the technique
of security promotion represented by the Morgan preferred list. In so
far as moral or ethical judgments are applicable to such procedures it
would seem futile to apply them to the individuals involved; rather,
they should be directed, not merely against the existing business code,
but against the system under which such codes naturally develop.

Another example. General Motors sells automobiles and advertises them in
the *Saturday Evening Post*, which is one of the reasons why the *Post*
can pay high prices for articles and fiction and yet sell for a nickel.
But the fact that General Motors and other automobile manufacturers
advertise in the *Saturday Evening Post* also serves to explain certain
elements in the editorial content of the magazine. The Post by reason of
its advertising lineage becomes an important and profitable business
property, one of a group of business properties. Hence the editorial
policy of the *Post* is inevitably conservative in its policies. With
equal inevitability its editorial management is favorably disposed
toward the specific interests of its advertisers. The *Post* may or may
not consider itself primarily an advertising medium; it is so regarded
by the advertiser and his agent. The advertising manager of the *Post*
must be prepared to show that the *Post* is a profitable medium, a
favorable medium; that the editorial content of the magazine is
favorable to, and supplements, the message of the advertiser.

*Saturday Evening Post* readers will perhaps recall that automobile
fiction stories appear recurrently in that magazine; that these and
other stories are often illustrated with happy and prosperous people in
automobiles. Naturally the artist is not permitted to make recognizable
a particular make of automobile.

The implication must, of course, be qualified before it can stand. It
would be expected in an automobile age that automobiles should figure in
much contemporary fiction. It would be impossible for the *Post*, which
solicits and publishes advertising of all kinds of products, to
emphasize unduly in its editorial columns the use of any particular
product.

But it would also be bad business not to utilize the editorial content
of the magazine to increase its value to advertisers, and that is
exactly what is done as a matter of course, not merely by the *Post*,
but by many other newspapers and magazines of large circulation, such as
*Good Housekeeping*, *House and Garden*, *Arts and Decoration*. It is
inevitable, since the publication is a business enterprise, that the
business accounting should extend to the editorial as well as the
advertising management; the deciding vote in any issue is naturally that
of the advertising management.

American children, even a heavy percentage of the children of working
class parents, brush their teeth. They have been taught to do so. By
whom?

By the manufacturers and advertisers of toothbrushes and toothpastes,
operating directly through signed advertisements in newspapers and
magazines, indirectly through the co-operation of the dental profession,
indirectly through the more or less syndicated “health talks” published
in newspapers and magazines, indirectly through the teaching of hygiene
in the schools. The co-operation of the dental profession is secured by
the distribution of free samples to dentists, the solicitation of
salesmen, etc: but also and more importantly it is sought by
“constructive educational” advertising in which the advertiser urges the
reader to “visit your dentist every six months”: such campaigns—that of
the S. S. White Company, manufacturer of dental chairs, mechanical
equipment, supplies, etc., is an excellent example—are in turn
“merchandized” to the dental profession in the professional
publications. “Merchandizing” consists essentially of advertisement of
advertisements. The manufacturer points out to the dentist how much he
is doing to “educate” the public to patronize the dentist, the
implication being that in consideration for the manufacturer's
expenditure in such “constructive” publicity, the dentist might well
recommend the particular product to his patients. In the case cited the
product was a good one, made according to a formula prepared by an
eminent dentist, and the advertising copy more or less aggressively
de-bunked the unscientific “talkingpoints” of competing dentifrices. A
number of manufacturers, notably Colgate, have followed this policy;
others, such as Forhan's, Pepsodent, Ipana, etc., have found it more
profitable to select a particular half -true talking point, exaggerate
it, use the simple technique of fear appeal, and while continuing to
seek the co-operation of the dental profession, discount the opposition
of the more sensitive and “ethical” section of the profession.

Education of another sort, secured through fostering the newspaper and
magazine propaganda of “health talks,” “preventive dentistry,” etc., can
rarely be made to benefit the interest of any particular manufacturer.
In general such education is likely to be sound enough in intent, and at
least harmless in effect, although sometimes objected to by dentists on
the ground that it is insufficiently critical and informative, and does
not—could not, since the publication is an advertising medium—take issue
with the bunk which is spread on the advertising pages. If the press
were or could be a disinterested educational instrumentality it might be
expected to correct the mis-education sponsored by its advertisers, but
then, if the press functioned in the interests of its readers rather
than in the interests of its advertisers, it would not publish
pseudo-scientific, more or less deceptive advertising. Again, the press
is merely an advertising “medium”; not until the ghosts which use this
medium to materialize their more or less sprightly profit-motivated
antics—not until these ghosts are exorcized can we expect the press to
be anything except precisely what it is. Ethical judgments are pretty
much irrelevant. A “good” medium is not a medium which materializes only
good ghosts; a “good” medium is a medium through which ghosts, good, bad
and indifferent can manifest themselves effectively. True, the more
respectable mediums are prejudiced against the more disreputable ghosts
and exclude them from their pages. But such prejudices and exclusions
are also likely to be economically rather than ethically determined; the
antics of the respectable ghosts require, for their maximum
effectiveness a decent parlor half-light, not th ebawdy murk in which
the directby-mail peddlers of aphrodisiacs, abortifacients, and
contraceptives squeal and gibber. And the bigger and better ghosts spend
more, and more reliably.

Another form of indirect education—that which makes use of our public
schools—has both its positive and negative aspects. A familiar example
of the positive use of this “medium” of formal education is the
“toothbrush drill” taught children in the primary grades. Manufacturers
of toothbrushes and of dentifrices have used and benefited by this
technique almost equally. They have enabled school boards to economize
by supplying free or at cost the literature used in teaching dental
hygiene, including various trick devices for making education amusing to
the young. Such education is neither very good nor very bad in and of
itself. But if a competent teacher or school nurse happens to believe,
as do many dentists, that the toothbrush is a dubious blessing; that it
should be used in strict moderation if at all; that the use, say, of
dental floss, is considerably more valuable hygienically—such a school
functionary is likely to encounter the pressures by which heretics are
disciplined—unless she can get the dental floss manufacturers to spring
to her aid. And finally, advertised toothbrushes and dentifrices are
likely to be absurdly overpriced; education which results in teaching
children to buy overpriced toothbrushes and dentifrices when the use of
ordinary table salt, with the occasional use of dental floss, would
constitute on the whole a more hygienic as well as more economical
regimen—such education has a certain unmistakable ghostly quality. But
the negative aspect of the advertising controls operating on our
publicly owned schools is vastly more important. In recent years a new
specialty has appeared in the teaching of economics; it is called
“consumption economics” and concerns itself with the consumer as a
factor in the economic scheme; how can the consumer best serve his own
interest? What is an intelligently balanced budget for a given income
level? What items should be bought and how can such items be bought most
economically? What are the possibilities and limits of such
developments—still embryonic in America—as consumers' co-operatives,
credit unions, consumers' research, etc.

On the surface there would seem to be merit in this idea of “consumption
economics.” But ask the secretary of your local chamber of commerce, or
the business manager of the local paper, or any prominent retailer what
*they* think about it. Or ask some of the consumption economists, such
as Robert Lynd, author of *Middletown*, just how far they have got in
their attempts to introduce such courses in the schools. The writer
asked such questions; the answers were somewhat disheartening. In
conclusion he asked an even more naive question: to whom do these public
schools belong anyway? The answer, of course, is that they belong to the
people, since *all* the people, directly or indirectly, pay taxes for
their support. But their use in the interest of *all* the people is
simply impossible, because the interests of the people are divided and
conflicting. In the case of “consumption economics,” any attempt to
perform for the masses of the population even the modest service which
Consumers' Research performs for its 50,000 subscribers—an expert
measurement of the qualities and values of products and services offered
for sale—is and will be met by the united opposition of business and the
allies of business: manufacturers, distributors, bankers, publishers all
the people who profit quite legitimately by selling products and
services in as great a volume as possible and for as much more than they
are worth as the traffic will bear: all these people and all the people
whose political voices they control: their employees, wives, sisters,
uncles, aunts and cousins—even perhaps some of the cousins who would
like to consider themselves disinterested school superintendents and
teachers serving the interests of all the people. The opposition is
unqualified and rigorous. Business men are also in a sense educators.
They use advertising and its related devices and techniques to “educate
the consumer,” to “break down sales resistance”; your earnest
“consumption economist” would like to use education to build up sales
resistance. But let him try to do it. Anybody who would want to cut the
Gordian knot of this “educational” dilemma with the liberal sword of
“ethics” is welcome to his pains.

In these few examples we have encountered advertising, propaganda and
education as parts of a single economic nexus. It becomes necessary at
this point to define these categories more sharply and to show their
interrelations.

The complex of phenomena is economic, institutional, technical,
psychological, whereas the tendency of current criticism by liberal
publicists has emphasized invidious ethical judgments. Yet it is only by
re-defining such value judgments that the play of forces can be
accurately described and analyzed. It is even more important to avoid
the artificial isolation of phenomena which superficial moral and
ethical criticism engenders. What we are dealing with is the
institutional and ideological superstructure of competitive capitalism.
Whether we take our cue from Marx or merely from the respectable social
ecologists, we may be sure that the mutual interaction of social
phenomena, whether categoried as economic, sociological or
psychological, is an immitigable fact; that when we seem to find
isolate, perverse and irreconcilable elements in the picture, we are
merely victims of our own thought patterns, for there can be nothing
mysterious or isolate about the phenomena. The contemporary French
historian, André Siegfried, is obviously aware of the continuity and
mutual interaction of the social and economic phenomena we have been
describing when he writes, in *America's Coming of Age*: “Under the
direction of remarkably intelligent men, publicity has become an
important factor in the United States and perhaps even the keynote of
the whole economic structure.”

Note that M. Siegfried is using “publicity” as an inclusive term to
denote all forms of advertising, propaganda and press agentry. The
writer would both widen and sharpen this inclusion by showing that the
apparatus of newspaper and periodical publishing, radio broadcasting,
motion picture production and distribution; with the conjoined apparatus
of advertising agencies, public relations experts, and dealers in
direct-by-mail, car card, and poster advertising, constitute in effect a
single institution; further, that the institutions and techniques of
formal education, both secondary and collegiate, are also closely
related and functional within the general scheme; that the purpose and
effect of these conjoined institutions and techniques is rule; the
shaping and control of the economic, social and psychological patterns
of the population in the interests of a profit-motivated dominant class,
the business class.

The necessity of such broad inclusions in any systematic analysis of the
phenomena becomes apparent when we come to define our major categories.
The definition of advertising offered by Frank Presbrey in his *History
and Development of Advertising* is as follows: “Advertising is printed,
written, or graphic salesmanship, deriving from oral salesmanship.”
This, of course, should be corrected to include radio and motion picture
advertising, but otherwise may be allowed to stand. The point to be
emphasized is that the practical advertising man views all these
instruments of communication —newspapers, magazines, radio, motion
picture—as *advertising media*; that this is in fact the accurate,
realistic and significant view to take of these instruments of social
communication, whereas the thought patterns of liberal laymen tend to
make them appear to represent some sort of ideal functional relationship
between editor and reader, or broadcaster and Great Radio Public—a
relationship which these curious parasitic growths, advertising and
publicity, are insidiously, immorally perverting. The layman sees that
the tail is wagging the dog. The advertising man knows that the tail is
the dog and acts accordingly. He knows that there is no real separation
between the business and editorial offices of a modern publication; that
where such a separation appears to obtain it is purely a management
device, designed to insure the more effective functioning of the
publication as an advertising medium. He knows, for he is called in as a
“publisher's consultant” to plan and execute the job—that the conception
of a modern commercial publication starts with the definition and
segregation of a particular buying public, which may be recruited and
held together by a particular type of editorial policy and content. The
publisher's consult ant sees an unoccupied, or insecurely occupied niche
in the crowded spectrum of daily and periodical publishing. The
publication is thereupon concocted to the specifications necessary to
entertain or inform that particular section of the buying public. The
objective is not attained, however, until the circulation so recruited
is sold to advertisers at so much per head, the charge being based on
the average buying power and the demonstrated “reader-interest” of the
readers. “Reader-interest” is measured by response to advertising and
the editorial content of the magazine is carefully designed, as already
indicated, to strengthen this response. You pay your money and you take
your choice, depending upon the nature of your product or service and
the methods by which it is promoted. The readers of *True Romances*, for
example, are poor but numerous and credulous, whereas the readers of
*The Sportsman* are comparatively few, but very rich—and susceptible to
the arts of flattery and sycophancy. In both cases the collaboration of
the editorial and business managements is intimate and accepted as a
matter of course. Criticism of such arrangements by the more or less
obsolete criteria of an ideal reader-editor relationship is beside the
point, since the determinants are the objective forces of the
competitive capitalist economy.

In propaganda we encounter a phenomenon even more disturbing and
puzzling to liberal publicists and sociologists, especially since the
experience of the war demonstrated the dominance of this technique of
social control in modern societies. Again, contemporary students have
been frustrated by their tendency to view the phenomenon as isolate and
adventitious.

The latest book on propaganda, which digests and summarizes much that
has been written on the subject by contemporary sociologists and
publicists, is *The Propaganda Menace* by Professor Frederic E. Lumley,
of Ohio State University. Professor Lumley experiences much difficulty
in reaching a satisfactory definition of propaganda. After rejecting
innumerable definitions offered by contemporary educators and
sociologists, he offers us the following:

> Propaganda is promotion which is veiled in one way or another as to
> (i) its origin or sources, (2) the interests involved, (3) the methods
> employed, (4) the content spread and (5) the results accruing to the
> victims—any one, any two, any three, any four, any five.

In Professor Lumley's view the contrasting opposite to propaganda,
necessary in defining any term, is “education.” And it is precisely
there that his definition falls down, because of the highly conditioned
and shifting quality of the latter concept. More or less aware of these
confusions, aware that education must be related to some conception of
social change, Professor Lumley takes refuge in the relatively
sophisticated and acute definition of education offered by Professor
Bode as follows:

When formal education becomes necessary in order to fit the individual
for his place in the social order, there arises a need for reflection on
the aims and purposes of education and of life. Many aims have been
proposed, but if we view intelligence from the standpoint of
*development*, the conclusion is indicated that aims are constantly
changing and that education is, as a matter of fact, the liberation of
capacity; or in Bagley's phraseology, it means training for achievement.
To make this liberation of capacity or this process of growth a
controlling ideal means the cultivation, of sensitiveness to the human
quality of subject matter by presenting it in its social context. The
fact that a given type of education is classed as liberal or cultural is
no guarantee that it fosters this quality of mind. Unless this
sensitiveness is deliberately cultivated, many human interests, such as
business, science and technical vocations, do not become decently
humanized. And to cultivate this sensitiveness deliberately means that
it is made the guiding ideal for education.

In this definition Professor Bode recognizes the necessity of relating
education to social change. He does not, in the passage quoted, take
account of the dynamics of social change. One does not need to insist
upon a strict Marxian interpretation to describe the essential nature of
social change. It will be readily granted by most readers that the
conflict of pressure groups within the social order results in shifting
balances of power; that these pressure groups tend to represent economic
classes; that the issues of conflict tend to be economic at bottom; that
the basic cause of change is the changing level of the productive
forces—in our day the machine technology. This is not to ignore the
equally real rôle played by pressure groups in the fields of the social
mores, religion, race, etc., but merely to emphasize the economic and
class roots of this perpetual conflict, where propaganda is so
powerfully instrumental.

If this is so, then there are certain crucial undefined terms imbedded
in Professor Bode's definition. What, for example, is meant by “fitting
the individual for *his place* in the social order”? Obviously the
students whom Professor Bode proposes to educate after this fashion
occupy not the same but different places in our social order, which,
while retaining a certain residual fluidity manifests an increasing
rigidity and class stratification. To fit a third generation Rockefeller
for his place in the social order is obviously a task different from
that of fitting Isidore Bransky, son of a radical East Side pants maker,
for *his* place, which is a matter of strictly limited but crucial
choice, depending upon whether young Bransky leaves his class or
doesn't; whether he is fitted to become a labor organizer, legal defense
worker, radical journalist or merely an energetic legal ambulance
chaser, political fixer or other capitalist functionary in business or
in the professions. Should or can the educator remain above the battle
as respects this choice? Will not the educational means by which
capacity is liberated necessarily affect it? Finally, would Professor
Bode attempt to deny that education in a typical university does
inevitably indoctrinate and that on the whole it indoctrinates in the
direction of conformity to the existing order? In honesty, must not the
teacher tell his student that ordinarily he must save his body by
serving an exploitative system and, if possible save his soul by helping
to destroy this system?

What is meant by presenting subject matter “in its social context”?
Whose social context? Does Professor Bode mean by social context the
contemporary class conflicts of American capitalism exacerbated by the
internal and international conflicts of our “surplus economy”? Does he
mean the perhaps imminent “freezing” of the capitalist structure into
the corporative forms of Fascism?

Returning to Professor Lumley, it might well be alleged that in urging
“education” as a preventive and cure of the propaganda menace, Professor
Lumley is really writing propaganda for a particular concept of
education: the concept of an objective, disinterested effort to release
capacity. Further, it might be argued that this concept is doomed to
remain in the field of theory, since it is observably nonexistent in
practice. Finally, it may be suggested that to erect a purely conceptual
theory of education, while ignoring the contemporary practices and very
real economic determinants of educators and the institutions they work
for, is itself a kind of propaganda: propaganda by suppression which is
one of Professor Lumley's recognized categories.

The necessity of such realistic clarifications cannot be evaded, and to
Professor Bode's credit it must be said that he, at least in his later,
more advanced position does not try to evade them. With Dewey, Counts
and other modern educators he acknowledges frankly that the theory of
education propounded in the passage quoted above is applicable only in a
classless society.

Behold, then, this precious absolute, education, the hope of democracy!
The more we turn it up to the light, whether we examine its practice or
even its theory as expressed by leading educators, the more it dissolves
in relativity. And our crucial problem remains with us: what is
education and what is propaganda with respect to the problems of the
individual in our society, faced as it is, with the self -preservative
necessity of fundamental social change?

If it were only possible to posit an ideal disinterested objectivity on
the part of the educator, and an absence of pressure controls operating
upon our educational institutions, the problem would be greatly
simplified. But, as we have seen, leading educators properly discard
such claims. The facts of class interest and individual subjectivity
must be and now are, generally admitted. The coercions of the social
order, for achievement in which the student is trained, these, too, are
frankly acknowledged. Recently Dr. Abraham Flexner has noted with proper
but perhaps futile indignation the tendency to vocationalize our
institutions of higher learning, that is, to make them functional with
respect to the requirements of business, and to the survival necessities
of students. And we have with us always the issue of “academic freedom”:
the degree to which a teacher is permitted to express views in conflict
with the economic and social status quo. The underlying fact, of course,
is that in both privately and publicly supported educational
institutions the interest and prejudices of the ruling class are
ultimately determining, whenever education enters the field of
contemporary social and political struggle.

Many teachers, even of the social sciences, are quite unconscious of
these determinants and preserve the confident illusion of “scientific
objectivity” in the very act of asserting creedal absolutes which are
obviously a product of social and economic class conditioning. Professor
Lumley is himself a conspicuous example of this. In his concluding
chapter he writes: “No sane person wants *revolutionary* communistic
propaganda spread in this country.” Is this the language of an
objective, disinterested educator? Professor Lumley urges that instead
of deporting and lynching Reds, their agitation be combatted (1) by
destroying the soil of gullibility through education and (2) by removing
desperate need through liberal reformism. Such recommendations may seem
relatively enlightened and civilized, but they are not quite sufficient
to rehabilitate Professor Lumley in his rôle of disinterested educator.

The dubiousness of his position would quickly appear under circumstances
such as the following: suppose that because of the disinterested
teaching of Dr. Lumley one of his students had escaped the
class-conditioned thought patterns of his family and friends, or that,
because of the logical capacities released by education he had broken
through these patterns. Suppose that this student, having acquired some
acquaintance with Marx, Engels, Veblen, Lenin and others, should elect
as the subject of his doctor's thesis *The Position of the Social
Scientist under American Capitalism*. The application of the Marxian
analysis to this material might well result in “revolutionary
communistic propaganda.” Would Professor Lumley pronounce his student
insane and withdraw his fellowship? If not, should he not have to
consider himself insane for permitting the spread of “revolutionary
communistic propaganda”?

One thinks of a third solution for this imaginary academic dilemma:
shove the student back into the educational mill and trust that on his
re-emergence he would have more sense. Then suggest to him, as an
interesting subject for a thesis, *Paranoiac Traits in Modern Radical
Leaders*.

It is indeed difficult to escape the conviction that the god of
education, like other gods, is not merely man-made, but made by a
particular group of men as a rationalization of their role in the
complex struggle of social forces—of “pressure groups”: further, that
the institutions built up to exemplify and discharge this rôle—our
schools and universities—are similarly subject to such rationalized
determinants. The claim of disinterestedness, of universality, is also
made for the press, although Professor Lumley has no difficulty in
seeing that the latter institution becomes inevitably an instrument of
pressure groups. The same claim is even made for business, the
instrument of profit-motivated property owners. All of these claims are
of course equally invalid; none of these institutions is separate or
self-sufficient; all are swept into the struggle of conflicting social
forces; advertising, propaganda and education are inextricably merged
and intertwined.

The contemporary fact of this confusion is excellently illustrated by
the propaganda activities of the National Electric Light Association, to
which Professor Lumley devotes an indignant chapter. The investigation
of the Federal Trade Commission and the writings of H. S. Raushenbush,
Ernest Gruening and others have familiarized most readers with the
theory and practice of this propaganda campaign in behalf of our
privately owned light and power corporations. It will be sufficient here
to point out that the instruments of advertising, propaganda and
education were all used in such a way as to reinforce each other, all
contributing to the crude economic objective of protecting and
conserving the vested interests of private property in exploiting for
profit an essential public service.

Direct, explicit, signed propaganda by the National Electric Light
Association and its member companies was used in the form of paid
advertising. This provided an economic leverage for the control of the
news and editorial content of the press as effecting the interests of
the light and power companies. Note that the press was in a bargaining
position. Newspaper publishers could and did on occasion threaten to
expose the iniquities of the “power trust” unless the local companies
could be brought to see the propriety of buying advertising space in
their papers. Once this concession was made, the papers willingly
“co-operated” with the NELA campaign, by printing the propaganda
furnished by the publicity directors in the form of mats, boiler plate
and mimeographed releases. One interesting and important point is
totally missed by Professor Lumley. In the case of the NELA campaign, as
of other propagandas by vested commercial interests, what was in effect
a method of control by bribery (blackmail from the point of view of the
NELA) was practicable only with respect to the smaller and less powerful
newspapers, just as it was only the less eminent professors who accepted
fees for making speeches and writing texts favorable to the power
interests. Integrity, as Stuart Chase has pointed out, is a luxury in
our civilization. It is, with certain qualifications, one of the
privileges of wealth and power. No evidence was produced to show that
the NELA had bribed the *New York Times*. Attempts were made to
influence the Associated Press, but that is a mutual corporation, in
which the pressure upon individual members backs up inevitably upon the
directing officials.

On the other hand, it is equally important to note that it wasn't
necessary to bribe the *New York Times*, and that, stupid as the NELA
publicity directors proved themselves to be, they probably had more
sense than to try to bribe either the *Times* or other major publishing
corporations. Yet the editorials in the *Times*, and its handling of
public utility news, especially with respect to the private versus
public ownership issue, have been pretty consistently favorable to the
power interests. Why? Obviously, because the Times is itself a major
capitalist property. It is part of the complex of financial, business
and social relationships which produces what is called a “conservative”
point of view. The owners and managers who express and make effective
this point of view are often not aware of the economic and social
pressures which influence them. They act unconsciously, much as an
experienced driver operates an automobile—he is “part of the car.” The
specific allegiance rarely becomes overt and fully conscious.

Respectable and powerful newspapers and magazines cannot be expected to
swallow and approve the rawer aspects of contemporary commercial
propaganda. The *Times* duly slapped the wrist of the National Electric
Light Association, following the exposures of the Federal Trade
Commission. It did not go down the line for Mr. Doheny and Secretary
Fall during the Teapot Dome scandal, though from time to time it
deprecates Congressional investigations as in general “bad for
business.”

Some service—not only lip service but actual service—is due the concept
of a “free press” and a modicum of such service can usually be obtained
even by radical minority groups. The amount and quality of such service
is determined by the circumstances of the individual case. The major
determining factors are: the inherent news value of the incident and its
relation to other current news; the success with which current liberal
concepts of free speech, legal rights, etc., can be appealed to; the
class origin and political orientation of the reporter who covers the
story; the current pressures of local, national and foreign news; the
reputation of the radical propagandist as a reliable news source; the
mass pressure brought to bear upon the newspaper.

The writer has served as a commercial publicity man, an advertising man
and as a radical propagandist. All these techniques require careful
measurement and utilization of the forces operative in a given complex
of public relations. Neither as a commercial propagandist nor as a
radical propagandist is it intelligent to act on the assumption that the
capitalist press is “kept,” to use the familiar half -true radical jibe.
It must always be remembered that the press has to “keep” itself; that
it has its own particular values, traditions and technical requirements
to conserve. Although, primarily because of the dominance of
advertising, the press functions in general as an organ of business, it
functions with relation to circulations which usually include a variety
of more or less organized and articulate pressure groups. Also,
journalism is a profession with an ethical tradition. Both the somewhat
eroded and romantic professional traditions of journalism and our
somewhat debilitated concepts of democratic freedom and fair play can
still be used to temper the winds of “public opinion” to the shorn lambs
of radical protest and agitation—especially when mass pressure in the
form of protests, strikes, and demonstrations is used to force the
issue.

Yet it must be confessed that these are all frail reeds to lean upon in
a pinch, especially if the pinch is local. To illustrate this last
point, it is sufficient to point to the contrast between the handling of
the 1931 disorders in the Kentucky coal fields by the Kentucky press, as
against the performance of the distant metropolitan journals and press
associations. The local editors editorialized against the “Red menace,”
and in their news reporting suppressed and distorted the unquestionable
facts of starvation of strikers, discrimination in the administration of
public and private relief, the capture of the machinery of justice by
the coal corporations and the violence of middle-class mobs. True, on
that occasion the Associated Press also broke down, because the local A.
P. reporter happened to be also one of the leaders of the middle-class
mob which illegally deported one of the successive delegations of
writers and students which entered the strike area to bring relief to
the strikers and to report the facts of the situation to the country at
large. *But* the protests of Dos Passos and others were effective on
that occasion: the offending A. P. correspondent was dismissed. And
shortly afterward the *New York Times* sent a special correspondent, Mr.
Louis Stark, to Harlan County, where he did an honest and competent
reporting job in a series of signed articles.

A similar situation developed in connection with the Scottsboro case, in
which seven negro boys faced legal lynching in a situation growing out
of race prejudice and conflict fostered by ruling-class economic
interests. The evidence on which the boys were convicted, later shown to
have been largely perjured, was accepted pretty much without question by
almost the entire Southern press. The lynch atmosphere surrounding the
first trial was largely suppressed. The case was consistently “played
down” throughout the South. Citizens of New York learned more about the
Scottsboro case through the papers than citizens of Alabama. As a result
of the efforts of the International Labor Defense, a Communistled
organization, a new trial was ordered by the United States Supreme
Court. The boys were again convicted by a jury obviously swayed by
anti-negro, anti-Jew and anti-radical appeals to prejudice. But the *New
York Times* reporter, Mr. F. W. Daniell, reported the trial with notable
accuracy and fairness, whereas the Southern press for the most part
continued the policy of suppression and distortion, dictated by the
pressures of local and regional ruling-class prejudice and interests. In
this case the factor of professional pride entered also into the
equation. The prosecution made the mistake of treating Mr. Daniell and
other correspondents with scant courtesy. Promptly and without
trepidation, Mr. Daniell, both in his personal conduct and in his
dispatches, made it clear that the Alabama authorities were in no
position to bully and coerce the correspondent of the *New York Times*.

The press handling of the communist-led Hunger March to Washington in
the fall of 1932 provides another interesting example. In this case the
Hoover Administration broadcast appeals to State and local authorities
to “stop the Hunger March.” The evidence is overwhelming that the press,
actuated by the alarm of the administration and of business, undertook
more or less concertedly to play down and ridicule the demonstration.
The dispatches, both while the columns were enroute to Washington and
after their arrival, were so colored and so flagrantly editorialized as
to surprise even experienced radical organizers. The demonstrators were
“neither hungry nor marching.” The March was treated as a Communist
publicity stunt and both the leaders and the rank and file were
consistently ridiculed. Radio and news reels joined this hostile chorus.
But in the end, after the Washington police had executed their
melodramatic coup, and the 3,000 marchers were practically imprisoned on
a stretch of windswept highway on the outskirts of the capital, the
unity of the conservative press front began to crack.

There were several factors in this partial failure of the anti-communist
propaganda. In the first place, the Communist organizers of the
Unemployed Councils, hugely handicapped as they were by lack of funds
and by the terrified inertia of the destitute unemployed workers, had by
sheer drive and energy accomplished a notable feat in bringing the three
columns of marchers to a point of convergence on the capital within a
few hours of each other. In the second place the more radical working
class groups in the cities through which they passed had cheered the
marchers, aided them with contributions of food and shelter, and
otherwise counteracted the efforts of the authorities to disintegrate
and abort the enterprise. In the third place, Herbert Benjamin, the
Communist Director of the march, proved himself to be a cool,
resourceful, courageous and humanly appealing leader. He contrasted
favorably with Major (Duck -Legs) Brown, who directed the forces of the
District of Columbia police. The genuine discipline of the marchers
contrasted favorably with the provocative brutality and obvious
unfairness of the police. Protests, sponsored by more or less well-known
liberals, and invoking the rights of free speech, appeal to the
government, etc., were duly printed in the conservative papers. From the
publicity point of view, the most effective effort on the radical side
was the delegation of socially prominent New York women which came to
Washington and protested to Vice President Curtis and various
Congressmen and Senators. Known radicals, however prominent, are
comparatively useless for such purposes; their protests are not “news”
and the conservative press virtuously plays them down as
“publicityseekers.”

In the case of the Washington Hunger March the protests of the prominent
liberals and radicals helped, but what helped most was the fact that
Hoover, his official family and the brass hats of the army were
personally unpopular with the Washington correspondents and with the
staff members of the local papers. This unpopularity was a factor in the
forthright protests and the vigorous news writing which accompanied and
followed Hoover's expulsion of the Bonus Army a few months before. The
*Washington News* printed the flagrant facts of police brutality and
provocation and editorially protested (The *News* is the local
Scripps-Howard paper and the city editor happened to be a liberal, as
well as personally popular with the newspaper fraternity. ) At this
point the hitherto almost unanimous hostility of the capitalist press
began to falter. The disparity of forces, as between the microscopic
army of determined, but unarmed and unviolent marchers, and the armed
might of the government police and military made the administration's
effort to convert the demonstration into a Red scare seem a little
ridiculous. The climax came when Benjamin executed his hair-raising
“dressrehearsal,” after which he had said: “Tomorrow we march.” The next
day came the official order permitting the marchers to enter Washington.

What, by the way, was this performance? In its essence it was
propaganda, or if you like, education, in one of its highest
manifestations: that of strategic, dramatic action. It had its effect,
despite the effort of the conservative press to suppress and distort its
significance and muffle its reverberations.

With respect to this case there are a number of interesting points to be
noted. First, the Washington press, especially the *News*, treated the
marchers more fairly on the whole than the New York papers. In some
instances the latter headlined the dispatches of their correspondents in
such a way as to distort, always in derision of the marchers, the true
bearing of the story.

The apparent reversal of the usual in such situations is simply
explained. In this case the pinch was not so much local as national. The
ruling-class and middle-class interests and prejudices served by the
capitalist press throughout the country were vigorously hostile to the
Communists and especially hostile to that particular demonstration. But
in Washington thousands of people had witnessed the inept and brutal
performance of the police. Although middle-class Washington public
opinion was in general hostile or indifferent to the marchers,
Washington didn't like Hoover, nor did it like the repetition, by a
defeated and discredited administration, of tactics rawer if anything
than those employed against the Bonus Army.

The Washington papers did nothing comparable to the exploit of a *Daily
News* reporter who invented out of whole cloth and published a speech
alleged to have been made by Herbert Benjamin, violently inciting his
followers to a bloodthirsty attack upon Washington. Theoretically, the
*News* couldn't do such a thing because it is a mass paper sold to
“Sweeney,” the working man—or at least its promotion literature so
alleges. It was the Struggle of Sweeney that Benjamin was supporting.
Actually, something of the sort was to be expected. The *News* uses
sensational tabloid methods to exploit, for purely commercial purposes,
the economic illiteracy and the economic and psychological helplessness
of its readers. The News is a business property, a commercial,
profit-making enterprise, and an *advertising medium.*

With the foregoing case histories in mind, let us return to our major
categories, advertising, propaganda and education, and examine once more
the liberal views of Professor Lumley and others. The thing to look for
in any system of social communication is the point of control.
Obviously, the key phenomenon is advertising, which is in turn merely an
instrument of competitive business. A commercial publication is an
advertising medium, that is to say, an instrument by which advertisers,
with the complex of interests and prejudices which they represent, shape
and control the economic, social and political patterns of the literate
population: directly through the signed advertisements themselves;
indirectly through the controlled or influenced editorial content of the
publication; indirectly through the controlled or influenced content of
formal education in the schools and colleges.

When a powerful vested interest, such as the electric power industry,
wishes by means of propaganda to shape public opinion favorably to its
interests, it is advertising that enables it readily to employ the
instruments of the daily and periodical press, radio, motion picture,
etc., for this purpose. Advertising is, of course, itself propaganda,
but more important, the granting or withholding of an advertising
contract offers a means of bribing or coercing indirect propaganda in
the editorial columns of the publication. Finally, where such bribery or
coercion is impracticable, as in the case of powerful publications like
the *Times*, the same end is secured by reason of the fact that the
*Times* is an advertising medium. As such it is an instrument of
business, and its editorial policies are conditioned by the pressures of
the dominant economic forces.

Professor Lumley exclaims at the omnipresence of propaganda. Our
civilization, he says is “spooky” with the ghosts of propaganda hiding
behind every bush. The professor has had nerves. Propaganda is no more
and no less omnipresent than the vested interests of competing and
conflicting economic and social pressure groups. The balance of power is
held by business, which, through advertising, controls the instruments
of social communication. There is nothing mysterious about it, nothing
moral, nothing ethical and nothing disinterested. How could there be?
Miracles don't happen in the body politic any more than they do in the
physical body of man.

Advertising is propaganda, advertising is education, propaganda is
advertising, education is propaganda, educational institutions use and
are used by advertising and propaganda. Shuffle the terms any way you
like, any one, any two, any three, to paraphrase Professor Lumley. What
emerges is the fact that it is impossible to dissociate the phenomena,
and that all three, each in itself, or in combination are *instruments
of rule*.

Whether the use of these instruments is veiled or overt will doubtless
continue to be a matter of grave ethical concern to liberals like
Professor Lumley. But the majority of the propaganda to which he objects
is overt.

Every journalist knows this. The editors of *The New Yorker* are
journalists, highly competent and sophisticated in that field, and they
take great pleasure in jibing at the bizarre efforts of the “public
relations” experts. On occasion they become as disgusted as any man
about town can permit himself to become without risk of rumpling his
hair. The following comment from *Talk of the Town* in its issue of Feb.
10, 1934, is an example. The note is headed *Many Happy Returns* and I
quote the first and the concluding sentences:

> The Quadruple-Screw Turbo-Electric Vessel Queen of Bermuda, Capt. H.
> Jeffries Davis, was the scene last week of a novel birthday party for
> President Roosevelt and the Warm Springs Foundation on behalf of the
> Bermuda News Bureau, the Furness Bermuda Line, the Fashion Originators
> Guild, and *Island Voyager Magazine*, by special arrangement with
> James Montgomery Flagg, Howard Chandler Christy, Carl Mueller, John
> LaGatta, McClelland Barclay, forty mannequins, the six most beautiful
> girls in America and Lastex. Mrs. James Roosevelt, mother of the
> President, received....  
> Her son, Franklin, in whose honor the party was given, was fifty-two
> years old; and there were moments... when we wondered whether the
> country he has been working so hard to save was worth the effort.

One is moved to ask Professor Lumley if there is anything insidious or
lacking in frankness about this extraordinary synthesis of personal,
political, philanthropic and commercial propaganda? Let us consider for
a moment, realistically, this question of the veiled or overt use of the
instruments of social communication as a problem in tactics. One admits
that the public which sees the end result only is frequently unaware of
the origins of propaganda. But ordinarily the propagandist himself
proceeds quite overtly in manipulating his instruments.

Advertising is overt enough as to its origin or sources because it is
signed by the advertiser. The interest involved is overt; the advertiser
wants to sell you something for more than it is worth, so that he can
make a profit on the transaction. The method is more or less tricky,
since it usually involves taking advantage of the economic, social and
psychological naivete of the reader. The results accruing to the reader
or to the advertiser are pretty much unpredictable as to either party.

The majority of successful propaganda practice, whether by commercial
“public relations counsellors” like Edward Bernays and Ivy Lee or by
radical propagandists is overt; the name of the propagandist or the
company or organization he represents is typed or printed at the top of
his release. Sometimes commercial interests use dummy organizations as a
“front.” For example, the munitions makers are more or less back of the
National Security League, just as the Communists are more or less back
of various peripheral organizations in the field of labor defense,
relief, etc. But to suppose that the hard-boiled publishers and editors
of the commercial press are taken in by these fronts is to be impossibly
naïve. Also, in the case of a powerful commercial client, such as, for
example, the Rockefeller interests, Mr. Lee has everything to gain by
having the release come from 26 Broadway. And in the case of the radical
propagandist, nothing makes the city desk so suspicious and sour as
clumsy attempts at indirection. As already pointed out, Benjamin's
“dress-rehearsal” of the Hunger March into Washington was excellent
propaganda and surely that was overt enough. Admittedly, occasional
veiled publicity coups come off successfully; but the percentage of such
triumphs is relatively negligible and the backlash the next time you try
to make the papers more than wipes out your gains.

The publicity Machiavellis of the National Electric Light Association
were the laughing stock of the public relations profession and the
catastrophe which befell them was cheerfully predicted long before it
happened. They failed precisely because they were not sufficiently
overt. So far as the press was concerned, all they had to do was to walk
in the front door of the business office, sign their advertising
contracts and get pretty nearly everything they wanted. Expense? “The
public pays the expense,” to quote Deak Aylesworth's classic line.
Instead of which they employed the most extraordinary collection of
publicity incompetents that has ever been assembled under one tent. They
were equally stupid when it came to professors. All they succeeded in
hiring were cheap academic hacks who in the end did them more harm than
good.

As already pointed out, business can influence or control our schools
and universities when it wants to or feels that it has to. Professor
Lumley's ideal purification of the educational function falls down at
this point and at a number of others, suggested in the following
questions: how does an educator, unless one grants an inconceivably
psychological self-awareness, know whether or not be is “veiling” the
origin or sources of his instruction, the interests involved, the
methods involved or the content spread? How can he anticipate the
results accruing to the victims of either education or propaganda?

Apparently, what chiefly confuses liberals like Professor Lumley is the
residual ideological and institutional débris of “democracy.” The thing
becomes instantly explicit and forthright when rule is exercised by a
dictatorship and competition for rule is eliminated by force. The
liberal illusions of a free press, free radio, free speech,
constitutional rights, objective education, etc., all disappear almost
overnight. This has been happening under our eyes in Russia, Italy and
Germany. Do liberals have to be cracked on the head before they can see
it?

Pinkevitch, in his *Education in Soviet Russia*, classifies propaganda,
and agitation as forms of education operating on somewhat lower
intellectual levels. Press, radio, schools, colleges, are all owned and
operated by the state as instruments of *rule* in behalf of the ruling
class, the class of workers and peasants. The purpose for which these
instruments are used is to make Communists, just as they are used in
Italy to make Fascists, and in America to make our curious menagerie of
capitalists, capitalist snuggle-pups, saps, suckers, morons, snobs,
pacifists, militarists, wets, drys, Communists, liberals, New Dealers,
double dealers and Holy Rollers.

In America the industry is hugely ramified but the underlying
motivations, controls and mechanisms are relatively simple, although, of
course, as in any transitional period of social conflict, the balance of
power is constantly shifting. A capitalist democracy is a state of
conflict almost by definition. Rather than to catalogue these conflicts,
expressing themselves in the form of propaganda, it would seem more
profitable to accept our instruments of social communication for what
they are: *instruments of rule*; then to describe how these instruments
are used, in whose behalf and to what end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/12-rorty-1934-chapter-eight-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/12-rorty-1934-chapter-eight-original.pdf)</sup>

<sup>*Eighth\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>
