**DOI:** 10.21428/3f8575cb.932e6753

<sup>*Eleventh\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/15-rorty-1934-chapter-eleven-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/15-rorty-1934-chapter-eleven-original.pdf)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER 11
==========

*BEAUTY AND THE AD-MAN*
-----------------------

WE HAVE seen that, since advertising is essentially a traffic in belief,
the profession habitually takes the name of Truth, though usually in
vain. But since Beauty is Truth, Truth, Beauty, the profession is also
forever rendering vain oblations at the shrine of Beauty.

This worship has two major phases. The first is the manufacture, by
advertising, of successive exploitable concepts of feminine beauty, of
beauty in clothes, houses, furniture, automobiles, kitchens, everything.
The second phase of this worship has to do with the ad-man's view of his
own craft, and would appear to represent, in part at least, a perversion
of the normal human instinct of workmanship.

From some reason it is thought necessary for the ad-man, not merely to
sell the idea of beauty for profit, but to sell beauty beautifully. Why?
Is there not something excessive and pathological about advertising's
will-to-be-beautiful?

It is contended that an attractively designed advertisement of an
allegedly beautiful toilet seat is more effective than an ugly
advertisement of the same object. But this has never been proved
conclusively. On the contrary, there are many examples of very ugly
advertising which have been exceptionally effective. Yet the desire for
beauty in advertising is inextinguishable and has more or less had its
way. Fifteen years ago the well-designed newspaper or magazine
advertisement was the exception; today it is the rule. Has the
effectiveness of advertising increased proportionately? On the contrary,
it has decreased, and one of the factors in this decline is undoubtedly
the increased cost of producing this economically superfluous beauty in
advertising. In any case, beauty of design or text is only one of the
many variable, more or less unknown and unpredictable factors in the
selling relationship established by the advertisement. And finally, it
would be easy to show that even in 1929, when artists were often paid
$2,000 for a single painting, photographers $500 for a single print and
typographers equally fancy prices—even in the heyday of
art-in-advertising, cheap and ugly advertisements frequently sold goods
just as well or better. And today, what could be uglier than the inane,
story-inpictures advertisements which sell Lux, Fleischmann's Yeast,
Lifebuoy Soap, and other products with demonstrated effectiveness?

There is, of course, a recognized and demonstrated commercial
justification for using expensive “art” and expensive typography in the
advertising of certain luxury products such as perfumes, de luxe motor
cars and the like. The principle is that of “conspicuous waste,” used to
create an ambience, a prestige for the product, which will lift it above
the rational level of pride competition. The familiar snob appeal,
applied to such prosaic commodities as fifteen-cent cigarettes and
twenty-five-cent collars, also accounts for a good deal of conspicuous
expenditure in advertising “art,” and up to a certain point, this is
commercially justifiable. Yet it remains true, as many hard-boiled
professionals have pointed out, that beauty has been permitted to run
hog-wild in contemporary advertising practice. Carroll Rheinstrom,
Advertising Manager of *Liberty*, was recently quoted in *Advertising
and Selling* as believing that 90% of current advertising is waste
because of the ad-man's pre-occupation with his own techniques, to the
exclusion of practical economic considerations.

No, the logical economic explanations don't make sense. Advertising
today, while anything but efficient, is far better designed and written
than it needs to be; obviously it costs far, far more to produce than it
ought to cost. Part of the explanation, I think, lies in a private
impurity of the advertising craftsman; he is more interested in beauty
than he is in selling. For him the advertisement is a thing-in-itself .
Highly developed craftsmanship in the graphic arts and in writing,
enormous expenditures of mechanical skill, are deposited at the shrine
not of Mammon but of Beauty. And all pretty much in vain. The art isn't
really art. The writing isn't really writing. And frequently the worst
“art” and the worst “writing” sell products better than the best art and
the best writing.

Yes, the explanation of this curious phenomenon may well be that
advertising, since it doesn't make sense in economic, social or human
terms, jumps right through the LookingGlass and becomes a
thing-in-itself!

It takes a naïve eye to see this. I had to have it pointed out to me by
a poet friend who makes his living writing prose for a very expensive
magazine. He picked up a copy of the publication and pointed to a Camel
cigarette advertisement in color. How much did that cost, he asked? I
estimated rapidly: $1,000 for the drawing, add $200 for the time of the
art director and an assistant, $400 for the color plates, $100 for
typography, $100 more for miscellaneous mechanical charges, $100 for
copy, $300 pro-rated for executive and management charges. Total for one
advertisement, not counting the cost of the space, about $2,300.

“Well,” commented my poet friend, “that's the end-result, isn't it?
That's why Kentucky planters go bankrupt growing tobacco, why negro and
white share croppers sweat, starve and revolt, why millions of men and
women diligently smoke billions of cigarettes all so that this
magnificent advertisement might be born and live its little hour.”

My friend was treating himself to a little poetic license, of course.
But the more I stared at the phenomenon, the more I became convinced
that it made just as much sense upside down as right side up. And the
more I reflected upon the role of the “creative worker” in advertising,
the more I came to suspect skullduggery of an obscure, unconscious sort.
Ostensibly these craftsmen are employed to write words and draw lines
that will persuade their fellow man to buy certain branded cigarettes,
soaps, toothpastes, gadgets, etc. But do these fellows really give a
whoop about these gadgets and gargles or whether people buy them or not?
Did I, when I was a member in good standing of the profession?

Never a whoop nor a whisper. What I cared about was my craft, and that
is what every genuine craftsman cares about—that and nothing else. Each
piece of copy was a thing-initself. I did a workmanlike job, not for
dear old Heinz, or Himmelschlussel, or Rockefeller, or whomsoever I was
serving indirectly, but for myself; because it was pleasant to do a
competent job and unpleasant to do a slovenly job. I was aware, of
course, that Mr. Rockefeller, via the agency, was paying me, and I tried
not to get fired. But I never worried about my duty to Mr. Rockefeller
and to his oils and gadgets. The prospect, the customer? I was a bit
sorry for the customer, and tried to let him off with as little
bamboozlement as possible. But my real loyalty was to the Word, to the
materials of my craft. Loyalty to the Word—writing a competent
advertisement—sometimes meant being pretty rough and mendacious with the
customer. I couldn't help that. I was carried away by the fury of
composition, just as a good Turkish swordsman becomes carried away in
his professional dealings with the Armenians.

But chiefly, I think, my indomitable instinct of workmanship was hard on
my employer. Unconsciously I sabotaged his interests continuously. I
wrote clean, lucid prose, when the illiterate screed that the advertiser
wanted to print would probably have sold more goods. When my immediate
superior plaintively objected that what I wrote was too good for the
audience to which it was addressed, I was indignant and recalcitrant.
Ordered to rewrite the advertisement, I seized the opportunity to bring
it closer to my standard of craftsmanship, which had nothing to do with
commerce. If the client objected, I bullied him if possible, and
otherwise made a minimum of grudging concessions.

A percentage of the copy writers in advertising agencies are craftsmen.
I have known scores of them. They felt as I felt, and consciously or
unconsciously, they did what I did. The artists were even more obsessed
and obstreperous. As I knew them, their disinterestedness in the profits
of Mr. Rockefeller was extreme. They were interested in drawing pretty
pictures. They drew them as well as they could, regardless of whom and
of what? Regardless of the advertiser and what he had asked them to
draw. Naturally, the picture had to convey a sales message, and they
chattered a great deal about “putting a selling punch” into their
pictures. But I noticed that the best of them became so interested in
the design and the drawing that they frequently left no room for the
copy or even for the trade-mark of the manufacturer. (This last I
suspect was a trick of the Freudian unconscious; the trade-mark was
resented because it was the signature of the advertiser.) When account
executives and advertisers repined at such extravagant oblations at the
shrine of Beauty, the artists were haughtier even than the copy writers.
And since the average American business man has a puzzled and diffident
reverence for art, coupled with an enormous ignorance of the nature of
artists, their motivations and techniques, these so-called “commercial”
artists did then and still do get away with an astonishing amount of
sheer mayhem and murder. The writers, too, though to a less degree,
because most advertisers can read and write. The technique is less
strange and the technician correspondingly less formidable. All account
executives in agencies, and worse still, all advertisers, have an
obscene itch to write themselves. Consequently the copy writer must
sternly and vigilantly keep these vulgarians in their places. I always
considered it to be my duty to stand on my dignity as a “genius”—the
word still goes big in the world of commerce, especially on the West
Coast—and *epater* these bourgeois, partly as a matter of self-respect,
and partly as a practical measure of professional and personal
aggrandizement.

Commercial artists and writers indeed! Art for art's sake was our motto,
and to hell with the advertiser. I can remember not one, but half a
dozen times when an advertisement was written, illustrated, set up in
exquisite type, and deposited in proof form on the account executive's
desk almost ninety-nine and three-quarters per cent pure. True, the text
had more or less to do with the product which we were supposed to be
advertising, but the advertiser's “message” was merely a point of
departure for the copy writer's lovingly executed exercise in pure
design, and the typography was a study in black on white which made no
concessions whatever to readability. The advertiser's trade-mark and
signature were either carefully concealed or left out entirely. Usually,
of course, these pure triumphs, these pious oblations at the shrine of
Beauty, caused the account executive to yell bloody murder. He was right
and we knew he was right. We had gone too far. We would therefore
execute a careful retreat from such tactical excesses, grumbling dourly
for the sake of the record that the account executive was obviously an
ignoramus, and that his precious client was a misbegotten idiot whom we
would like to kill and stuff with his own Cheery Oats, or whatever it
was he sold; that, however, as loyal employees of dear old Kidder,
Bidder & Bunkstein we would gladly give him what he wanted and hoped it
choked him.

We never did, of course, for that would have been to concede too much.
So that the client was kept in a constant, salutary state of baffled
rage, alarm and hope; and every now and then an unhappy account
executive would have a nervous breakdown. We never had nervous
breakdowns.

Does this seem exaggerated? But how can the honest chronicler record
fantasy except in the terms of fantasy? And the vast accumulation of
advertising during the post-war decade was fantastic in the extreme. It
is still fantastic. Look at it in the pages of any commercial magazine.
Does it make sense in terms of the sober, profit -motivated business
that advertising is supposed to be? Recently the investigators of the
Psychological Corporation discovered that the variation as between
advertisements of lowest and highest effectiveness runs as high as 1,000
per cent. An automobile assembly line is considered poor if it permits a
quality variation of more than 30 per cent. Is it sensible to believe
that a production technique which frequently shows 3,000 per cent
variation in the quality of the product is really aimed at its avowed
objective, namely the sale of products and services to customers? Well,
if I were out duck shooting and missed my duck by 1,000 per cent, I
should consider it open to question whether or not I was really trying
to hit that duck.

No. To understand this phenomenon we must employ a far subtler analysis,
giving all the factors their due weight, no matter how fantastic these
factors are, and no matter how seemingly irrational the conclusion to
which we are led.

Again, Veblen furnishes us with the essential clue. In the *Theory of
Business Enterprise* and elsewhere in the whole body of his work, Veblen
notes that advertising is one element of the “conscientious sabotage” by
which business keeps the endlessly procreative force of
science-in-industry from breaking the chains of the profit system. In
this view the business man figures as an art-for-art's-saker. His art is
the making of money, which has nothing to do with the use of the
productive forces by which a society gains its livelihood. The art of
making money is perhaps the purest, the most irrational art we know, and
its practitioners are utterly intransigent. Today these artists in money
making are prepared to starve millions of people, to plunge the planet
in war, to destroy civilization itself rather than compromise the purity
of their art.

Veblen saw all this clearly, and Stuart Chase has employed the Veblenian
apposition of business and industry in a sequence of useful books. But
one might well go further and assert that the contradictions of
capitalism persist even within the mental gears and pistons of its
exploitative functionaries.

Business sabotages industry by means of advertising. True. But we, as
advertising craftsmen, consciously or unconsciously motivated not by a
desire to make money but by an obsessed delight in the materials of our
craft—we in turn sabotaged advertising. We were and are parasites and
unconscious saboteurs. During the whole postwar decade we gathered
strength, inflated our prestige, consolidated our power. More and more
the “creative worker” became the dominant force in agency practice, and
advertising consequently became more and more “pure.” The shrine of
Beauty was buried under the fruits and flowers placed there by devout
artists and writers in advertising. We were no humble starvelings. We
caused the salaries and fees paid advertising artists and artists to
become notorious. Even I, who was always more or less aware of what I
was doing, and who was indifferent to money for its own sake—even I,
without particularly trying, because I never could keep more than a
fraction of my mind concentrated on the absurd business, managed to
triple my salary during the postwar decade. Agency production costs hit
the ceiling, broke through and sailed off into the empyrean. We
developed an esthetic of advertising art and copy, a philosophy, a
variety of equally fantastic creeds—a whole rich literature of
rationalization which should interest the psychiatrists greatly if they
ever get around to examining it.

I say “we” with poetic license. I speak for the profession, but I speak
out of turn, and I shall doubtless be roundly repudiated and contemned
by the menagerie of Cheshire Cats, March Hares, Mad Hatters and Red
Queens who still roam the scant pastures on the other side, the *right*
side of the Advertising Looking-Glass. As a matter of fact I contributed
nothing to this literature of rationalization. I was too busy making a
living, trying to keep sane and do a little serious work on the side,
and wondering just how soon that beautiful iridescent bubble would
break, leaving us “creative workers” with nothing much in our hands and
a lot of soap in our eyes.

It broke. Came Black Thursday, and a chill wind blew through the
advertising rookeries of the Grand Central District. Advertising
appropriations were cut. That exquisite First Article of the Ad-Man's
Credo: “When business is good it pays to advertise; when business is bad
you've got to advertise,” was invoked with less and less effect. As the
months and years passed the whole structure of the industry began to
sideslip and sway. *And advertising became less pure*. That beautiful,
haughty odalisque had to hustle down into the market place and drag in
the customers. She had to speak of price. She became dowdy and blatant
and vulgar. The primitive techniques of Hogarth in the eighteenth
cenlury were resurrected via the tabloids, and the moronic sales talk
issued in ugly balloons from the mouths of ugly moronic figures.
Photography was cheaper than drawings and worked as well or better.
Testimonials were cheap and worked best of all.

Desperately, advertising began to step out of its part and tell the
truth a little. The customer got an occasional break. But advertising
lost her name, the poor girl. And it got worse. Every time car loadings
hit a new low, another big advertiser would go buckeye with testimonials
and other loathsome practices, and she would lose her name again.
Alarmed, the reformers of advertising started another vice crusade, and
their activities will be described elsewhere. They haven't ac-
complished much, despite General Johnson's benediction pronounced on the
“good” advertising that will be needed more and more under the New Deal.
Their voices become ever fainter and more faint.

Quite evidently the religion of Beauty-in-Advertising has entered upon a
period of decadence. The advertisers, being only one jump ahead of the
sheriff, or more often two jumps behind, are obliged to cut each other's
throats without benefit of Beauty. In fact many of them, having learned
wisdom from the tabloids, are openly blasphemous and vengeful with
respect to the art-for-art's-sakers. Pursued by their unforgiving
maledictions, the Priests of Beauty have fled to Majorca or Vermont,
where they nurse their wounds and wait. Not all of them, however. In
1932 and 1933, a few stalwarts attempted a counter-offensive against the
sansculottes who had laid waste the pleasant fields of advertising. The
more or less recognized leader of this gallant Lacedemonian band is Mr.
Rene Clarke, President of the firm of Calkins & Holden, Inc., one of the
oldest, most ethical, and most respected advertising agencies in
America. Mr. Clarke is a genuinely gifted designer whose worship of
Beauty is without flaw or compromise. Among his many triumphs is that of
so glorifying Wesson Oil that millions of American housewives consume
tons of it, under the impression, doubtless, that it is a kind of
champagne.

When the evil days came, Mr. Clarke had no pleasure in them, and no
sympathy for the panic-stricken advertisers who with more or less
success were trying to lift themselves out of the spreading sea of red
ink by the balloon technique borrowed from the tabloids. Hence, after
the slaughter of the morons had proceeded without benefit of Beauty for
three depression years, Mr. Clarke, in 1932, published in *Advertising
and Selling* the pronunciamento which is here quoted in full:

### *Challenge*

> *Bring me Idealism:* I'm tired of things that look like things as they
> are. Have you buried your hearts like pots of gold in the earth? You
> who are entrusted with the responsibility of showing others what they
> cannot see for themselves. If your eyes see only what is seen by
> others, from where will the vision come? You who have been so
> disdainful of the ordinary, will you stand aside now and let the
> ordinary lead you back to the paths that stretch up to the heights?
>
> You claimed to be the leaders, the gifted, sensitive few, who
> discerned and brought into being the beauty that is truth. The quality
> of leadership is tested by adversity. Because we have adversity, do
> you renounce your leadership and hoard your visions against that time
> when some one else has made a market for your talent?
>
> Is your sense of beauty so delicate that it cannot be exposed to the
> frost? Will you come out again like house flies at the first warm
> touch of prosperity's spring?

> *Bring me Courage:* I'm tired of conformity that hides behind the
> general use. It is indeed a low level that parallels the taste of the
> throng. If we all conform, wherein will the crowd find guidance away
> from the common level? You say it narrows your market. Nothing of
> worth has been created with one eye on one's market. One needs both
> eyes and yet more to see into one's heart, and it is from there that
> truth is born.
>
> Courage walks alone, even in the market places. The crowd must follow
> where the trail is blazed. Look at your idols. Did they hesitate
> because no one had been that way before? Did they wait for acceptance
> before they advertised their principles?

> *Bring me Imagination:* I'm tired of today and want to see tomorrow.
>
> I need an image, not of what I am, but of what I hope to be. Put away
> the mirror; set up the telescope. Was it not yesterday you boasted
> that your souls had wings, that you could penetrate rare atmospheres
> where the rest of us could not exist? Fly now, and bring us down a
> measure of that ozone.
>
> Bring us back from those excursions of the mind, which are the
> responsibility of your guild, a portion of wine to wash down our dry
> daily fare—wine from the vineyards of romance and imagination.
>
> If you bring us only bread, you become mere housewives serving the
> needs of the body, and we recede step by step from that estate which
> breeds the very license of your occupation.
>
> Have you no contacts with the gods that you only recite the
> conversations of the world? What binds you to this circling round and
> round? Can you not stretch your tether ever so little that the next
> circle would be trod on untrampled ground?
>
> Do you listen to those who counsel return to something which we had
> but have lost. That is the creed of those who lack imagination or
> courage and the refuge of those without plan. What we had we have not
> now. It belongs to yesterday, not today nor tomorrow. Others may lean
> on and borrow from the past, but you may not. Yours is the
> responsibility to create the new, the fresh, the vital vision of
> tomorrow, what we hope to be.

Obviously Mr. Clarke has gone dada, and I trust no person in this
audience will be so ungracious as to ask what he is talking about. In
the old days, when, in the heat of copy and art conferences, advertisers
voiced such impertinent questions, we always boxed their ears and told
them to mind their own business, if any. Often there was little enough
by the time we got through with them.

I regard Mr. Clarke's manifesto as a classic of its kind, and not
without its historic interest; for Mr. Clarke himself is perhaps the
last of the art-for-art's-sakers in advertising. His manifesto is
illustrated by a most artistic photographic study of the artist himself,
standing with one hand resting on his hip, the other hand lifted and
placed upon a pillar of the temple of advertising, the clear, unsubdued
eyes gazing into the distance. The pose is suggestive, even ominous.
What does this Samson of Art-in-Advertising mean to do? Shorn of his
prestige, will he gird his loins once more, and bring the whole temple
roaring down upon the heads of the Philistines? It would be a fitting
end.

Let us turn now to a consideration of the primary phase of the Ad-Man's
worship of Beauty: the manufacture by advertising of successive
exploitable concepts of feminine beauty, of beauty in clothes, houses,
furniture, automobiles, kitchens, everything. One notes three major
points: first, that these concepts must be as rapidly obsolescent as
possible; second, that the connotation of beauty with expensiveness is
rigorously enforced; third, that beauty is conceived of as functional
with respect to profitable sales, rather than with respect to satisfying
beautifully and economically the living and working needs of the
population.

Most exploitation of the idea of beauty reduces in practical terms to a
promotion of sales and profits through the fostering of obsolescence.
This is most apparent in the field of women's fashions. Here the
exploitative apparatus includes not only advertising in the narrow sense
of the word, but also the editorial propaganda of the style magazines,
plus a more or less collusive hook-up with the rotogravure supplements
of the newspapers, with stage and motion picture actresses, and with
Junior League debutantes. This complex promotion apparatus is utilized
to achieve, first, the fundamentally false identification of beauty and
fashion. The acceleration of fashion changes during the postwar period
is an index of the textile industry's rapid emergence into the “surplus
economy” phase of capitalism, with its entailed crisis. The life-span of
a successful style was roughly about a year in 1920. Today, according to
the testimony of well-known stylists, this life-span has dropped to less
than six months. The mortality of the candidates for fashion's favor has
correspondingly increased.

Winifred Raushenbush, in an article in the *New Freeman*, described the
dilemma of the dress manufacturer who knows that nine out of every ten
designs are doomed to “take a bath,” to use the trade jargon. This
mortality is about equally high throughout the fashion industry, whether
in hats, dresses or cloaks, and whether the manufacturer is serving the
high, medium or low style markets. Snobbism is, of course, the major
instrument of the promotion technique. The exquisite hauteur with which
both the advertisers in *Vogue* and the editor of *Vogue* lecture their
nouveaux riche readers is matched only by the slightly burlesqued
imitation of this manner to which indigent stenographers are subjected
when they look for bargains on Fourteenth Street. The diffusion of a
fashion change, both as to geography, and as between the high, medium
and low style levels has become almost instantaneous. Emulative
pressures are invoked all down the line. Women dress today not merely
for men, but for women as a form of social competition. So potent is the
style-terror that even during the depression the majority of women would
rather starve than risk the shame of nonconformity. They save and
scrimp, skip lunches, buy the latest mode, and four months later are
obliged to buy again—this time an “ensemble,” so that the manufacturers
of handbags and even cosmetics may also share in the profits of
styleobsolescence.

Deterioration of function fostered by advertising is especially
conspicuous in the field of fashion. Even in expensive high-style
apparel, the materials tend increasingly to be shoddy. And the crowning
joke is that for about fifty per cent of American women, the dress,
cloak and hat manufacturers do not produce, do not even attempt to
produce, clothes which have any relation to the physical type of the
women who are asked to buy them! This, at least, is the testimony of
Miss Raushenbush in another *New Freeman* article entitled “15,000,000
Women Can't go Nude.” They don't go nude, of course. They accept the
ruthless prescription of the current fashion, which is usually
appropriate for the young flapper type. It looks and fits like the devil
on the mature woman, the short woman, the tall woman, the “hippy” woman.
There are at least five major feminine types of these “forgotten women”
the existence of whom the fashion industry has barely deigned to notice,
let alone serve adequately.

In recent years the attempt has been made to extend the sway of fashion,
*i. e.*, profit-motivated obsolescence, into every conceivable field of
human purchase and use. Invariably this fashion offensive wears the
masque of beauty. Almost invariably, the net result is to increase the
tonnage of shoddy make-believe. One must say this at the same time that
one acknowledges in fairness that the industrial designers who have both
promoted and profited by this offensive, have tried to introduce some
slight measure of the substance and function of beauty, and in some
cases have measurably succeeded.

The motivation of this crusade is acknowledged in the title of an
article contributed by Earnest Elmo Calkins to *Advertising and
Selling:* “The Dividends of Beauty.” One readily acknowledges that
nothing, whether beautiful or ugly, can be made under a profit system
unless it does pay dividends. The point is that under a profit system
both the guiding esthetic and its expression by a profit -motivated
industry are severely limited and distorted, so that the net product of
beauty is likely to be meagre indeed. Says Mr. Calkins:

> The place of art in industry is becoming firmly established. A
> restaurant arranges common vegetables in patterns in its windows,
> taking full advantage of the different greens of peas, asparagus,
> cauliflower and artichoke, and adds eye-appeal to appetite appeal. A
> railroad landscapes its stations with grass plots and climbing roses
> and transforms an unsightly utility into an attractive eye-catcher,
> builds local goodwill, adds an esthetic touch to mere ordinary travel,
> and creates a new sales argument.
>
> Much has been accomplished in this new field, but the list is long of
> manufactured articles waiting for that beautifying touch which costs
> but little and adds so much to acceptance. The initial shape and color
> of most machine-made articles are ugly. Why, I don't know. Nature does
> not err that way. All her products are artistic and harmonious with
> each other. Some appeal to several senses. An ear of corn is pleasant
> to sight and touch.... Nothing but man with his filling stations,
> hot-dog stands and automobile cemeteries strikes a discordant note....
> A forest grows unhelped and is forever beautiful. A town grows as it
> will and looks like hell hit with a club. Beauty in man-made articles
> must be the result of conscious thinking....

Mr. Calkins, a veteran of the advertising profession, admits that he
doesn't know why most machine-made articles are ugly. By and large, the
writer must admit a similar ignorance. The glib radical answer would run
to the effect that it is not the machine, but the application of machine
technology to the making of profits that results in this ugliness. But
this answer doesn't cover all the facts by any means. Some machine-made
articles, even some machine-made consumer's goods, made for profit and
sold at Woolworth's, *are* beautiful. Many handmade articles are
ugly—Elbert Hubbard's de luxe editions for example, and much of the
present flood of sweatshop toys, china, etc., coming out of Japan and
Germany; also the neoMayan design in pottery and textiles which results
when the primitive social-economic pattern of a Mexican village is
shattered and the native craftsmen are Taylorized by a capitalist
entrepreneur. Yet the burial urns and other art objects turned out in
quantity during some of the best Chinese periods, trade-marked, and
exported for profit to Persia, were and are extremely beautiful.
Production for use does not necessarily result in beauty, nor does
production for profit necessarily result in ugliness. Estheticians and
sociologists have striven vainly to discover the rationale of beauty in
the social context of production, sale and use. The best that the writer
can offer is a tentative observation to the effect that the American
genius, operating under the conditions of modern industrial capitalism
burns brightest, and gives the largest product of beauty in the field of
producer's goods : the machines themselves, turbines, electric cranes,
modern factory architecture and the product of these factories for
strict use seen in bridges, viaducts, etc. On the other hand the
American blind spot is in the field of economic and social organization;
hence we are likely to find that a machine product, designed for sale to
the ultimate consumer usually, though not always betrays the disorder,
the insanity, the ugliness of our decadent capitalist economy and our
chaotic distributive system. In general I think it may be said that
where the salesman and advertiser, rather than the craftsman and
producer, are in the saddle, what the consumer gets is likely to be
ugliness. In a fragmented civilization such as ours, art and the artist
tend to be tossed off to the periphery of a system which no longer is
organic. Mr. Calkins would like to bring the artist back to the center
of the system, where, as industrial designer, he can contribute “that
beautifying which costs but little and adds so much to acceptance.” The
attempt is in fact being made on a considerable scale, but without much
success, and for very good reasons.

A very good industrial designer—there are a number of highly talented
Americans at work in this field—can control some but not all of the
factors which determine whether a product is to be beautiful or ugly. He
can't control the profitmotive and that is precisely where he falls
down. As a matter of fact, who is it calls in the industrial designer?
The advertising agency, usually, or the sales manager of the
manufacturer. Why do they call him in? To make the product a beautiful
object? Incidentally, perhaps, but primarily to make the product a
*salable* object. The designer hence must work not as an artist, but as
a showman, a salesman. If he were working as an artist, he would make
the form of the object express the truth of its function, not merely in
mechanical but also in economic and social terms, and it would be
beautiful. But his is perforce a one-dimensional art. Working as he
must, as a showman, he usually gives the object a novel flip of line or
color—he “styles” it in terms of the showman, not of the artist. As a
designer he finds himself frustrated and stultified by the false and
anti-social production relationships which condition his labor. The same
thing is true, of course, of the engineer, the educator, the doctor, the
architect, indeed of all creative workers in an acquisitive society.
Recently one of the best known and most highly paid industrial designers
in America came to me and asked what chance he would have of doing
serious work in Russia. He was fed up with the rootless frivolities that
sales managers had asked him to turn out.

It is in the field of package design that the artist has greatest
freedom and has scored his maximum of seeming successes. It is true that
simple, bold lettering, clear colors and good design produce more
sightly packages and that customers are attracted by such packages. It
is also true that these packages are likely to contain the same
overpriced, overadvertised and sub-standard content that they always
held. This package “beauty” is therefore skin deep, and its creation the
proper concern of business men and commercial dilettantes, not of
artists who have any conception of the social function of art. If these
packageers had any such conception they would probably feel obliged to
ask first, in three cases out of five, whether the product really ought
to be packaged at all.

It occurs to me that in discussing the role of the craftsman in
advertising I may have given the impression that his “conscientious
sabotage,” his interest in the materials of the craft rather than in
selling, his attempts to convert advertising into a thing-in-itself,
represent a genuine release of creative capacity. No such impression was
intended. If any genuine creation goes on in advertising agencies I have
never seen it. I have seen the sort of thing described: the crippled,
grotesque, make-believe of more or less competent craftsmen who played
with the materials of their craft but could never use them
systematically for any creative purpose. By and large there is no such
thing as art in advertising any more than there is such a thing as an
advertising literature.

The best of us, certainly, had more sense than to make any such
pretensions. I suppose that in some twelve years of advertising practice
I must have written some millions of words of what is called
“advertising copy,” much of it for very eminent and respectable
advertisers. It was all anonymous, thank heaven, and I shall never claim
a line of it. True, half-true and false, the advertiser signed it, the
newspapers and magazines printed it, the radio announcer blatted it, and
the wind has blown it away. It was all quite without any human dignity
or meaning, let alone beauty, and it cannot be too soon forgotten.

No, we knew what we were. On the door of the art department of an agency
where I worked, a friend of mine, one of the ablest and most prolific
commercial artists in the business, once tacked a sign. It read: “Fetid
Hell-Hole of Lost Souls.”

There are many hundreds of these “fetid hell-holes” in the major cities
of America. The inmates are, of course, dedicated to beauty, beauty in
advertising. Whether they knew it or not they are, as artists, so many
squeaking, tortured eunuchs. The Sultans of business pay them well or
not so well. They have made sure that they do not fertilize the body of
the culture with the dangerous seed of art.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/15-rorty-1934-chapter-eleven-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/15-rorty-1934-chapter-eleven-original.pdf)</sup>

<sup>*Eleventh\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>
