**DOI:** 10.21428/3f8575cb.d67c7840

<sup>*Twenty-first\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/25-rorty-1934-chapter-twenty-one-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/25-rorty-1934-chapter-twenty-one-original.pdf)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER 21
==========

*A GALLERY OF PORTRAITS*
------------------------

NO DESCRIPTION of the ad-man’s pseudoculture can be considered complete
without some notation of the curious atrophies, distortions and
perversions of mind and spirit which the ad-man himself suffers as a
consequence of his professional practice.

I have heard it said of So-and-so and So-and-so in the profession: “They
are born advertising men.” Obviously this cannot be true. Even if one
assumes the inheritance of acquired characteristics, the phenomenon of
advertising is too recent in biological time to have brought about any
substantial modification of human genes. Moreover, although I have known
many perverse and diabolical little boys, none of these creatures was
sufficiently monstrous to prompt the suspicion: “This will grow up and
be an advertising man.”

No, the ad-man is born not of woman, but of the society. He is the
subhuman or pseudohuman product of an inhuman culture. His insanities
are not congenital. They are the insanities of a society which, having
failed to embody in its growth process any valid economic, ethical or
moral concepts, is moronic in these respects. The ad-man seems
exceptional and terrifying merely because his whole being is given over
to the expression and dissemination of this moronism.

The ad-man is not necessarily an intellectual prostitute. As already
pointed out, if one accepts the economic and social premises of American
capitalism, the ad-man plays a logical and necessary rôle. The
production of customers, and the control of factory production in the
direction of profit-motivated obsolescence—these are functions in a
profit economy no less essential than the production of coal or steel.
Most advertising men feel this very strongly. It gives them confidence
and conviction, so that they are the more easily reconciled to their
habitual and necessary violation of the principles of truth, beauty,
intelligence and ordinary decency. They are profit-motivated producers
of customers, and they have the producer’s psychology. It is right and
beautiful to make a customer out of a woman, even though this involves
making her into a fool, a slave and a greedy neurotic. *It is so right
and so beautiful that the ad-man tends to make the same sort of thing
out of himself, his family and his friends.* I have had many friends in
the advertising business who have been solicitous about me, because of
my unorthodox views. At various times I have been put to some
embarrassment to keep them from trying, for the good of my soul, to make
me also a fool, a slave and a greedy neurotic. Your run of the mill
ad-man has no inferiority complex; indeed he is positively messianic
about his profession there isn’t a doubt in a carload of these fellows.

This sounds quite mad, but it is also quite true. The inference, also
true, is that the society is mad; the ad-man is exceptional only in that
he carries more than his share of the burden of this madness.

Hence it is easy to absolve the ad-man on the ground that he knows not
what he does. This, I think, is a just acquittal for the vast majority
of the profession. But there are, of course, many exceptions. There are
many men and women in the profession who have explored worlds of the
mind and the spirit lying beyond this Alice-in-Wonderland world of the
advertising business. They are perhaps somewhat to be blamed, especially
those fallen angels who use their exceptional qualities of mind and
imagination actively to promote what they know to be a very dirty and
anti-social traffic. The distinction, while tenuous, is, I think,
genuine. It is between the intellectually sophisticated ad-man who sells
a part of himself to make a living, and the greedy cynic, often with a
will-to-power obsession, who sells *all* of himself. I and most of my
friends in the business belonged to the first category, which is fairly
numerous. The will-to-power cynic is quite exceptional, and,
incidentally, he usually goes mad, too; he tends to believe in and
justify this acquired, distorted self; so that in the end we see this
ex-literary man or ex-artist as a Captain of Advertising, frothing at
the mouth at advertising conventions, or leading his hosts of devout,
iron-skulled ad-men into battle for God, for country and for Wet Smack
chocolate bars.

In the portrait studies which follow I have tried to include
proportionate representation of all three basic types. While these
studies are based on the writer’s observation of real people, they are
all composite portraits; names, places and incidents have been
disguised. The writer is not interested in attacking individuals; rather
he permits himself the faint hope that some very likable ad-men who may
read this book may be freed from the coils of the “systematized
illusions” in which they have become entangled along with their victims.
When, as now, we are faced with the necessity of building a civilization
to replace the self-destroying barbarism which has hitherto contented
us, it is well to have as many people as possible know what they are
doing, even though what they are doing happens to be a mean and dirty
job. Most jobs are like that in our society, if that is any comfort.

### ECONOMICS

Pete Sykes is the American University’s great gift to advertising, and
perhaps the most typical advertising man I know.

In both the smaller and larger American colleges and universities,
during the period just before the war, the mindset of the average bright
young man was determined by the time he became a sophomore. Pete was
above the average as to energy and charm, but in all other respects he
was the perfect stereotype of the extraverted, emulative, career man in
his undergraduate phase.

He had some literary talent and made the staff of the college newspaper.
He had some executive ability and became assistant manager of the
football team. He was personable, his family was good enough, and he
made one of the snootiest fraternities. All this happened during his
first two years. As to his studies: in a moment of confidence he once
confessed to me that he could make nothing of Professor Ely’s economics,
although he had studied hard in that course. He had determined to make a
million dollars after graduating, and he had been given to understand
that economics was the science of making a million dollars.

When Pete made this confession he was the managing head of a large
Middle Western agency. Although then only in his early forties he had
already made about half that million dollars. Without benefit of Ely,
however. I tried to explain. I cited the correspondence of a radical
editor with an engineer, exiled in Alaska, whose grown sons were in
college in Seattle and also studying Ely. The engineer became curious
and read Ely himself. He wrote: “I think Professor Ely should have
married Mary Baker Eddy, for they are manifestly agreed as to the
non-existence of matter. And if they had married, I am confident that
their child would have been a bubble.”

Pete laughed and asked me what book he could read that did make sense. I
suggested Thorstein Veblen’s *Theory of Business Enterprise*. Fine!
After lunch he stepped into a book store and ordered the book; also a
new detective novel.

I wasn’t horsing Pete. He was and is a good fellow, with enough salt in
his nature to make him worth taking seriously, which is more than can be
said for most advertising men. After graduating he had been a newspaper
reporter, and he understood the surfaces of American life very well. He
was tolerant, too, if realistic. A year later he fired a friend of mine
on the ground that my friend’s insistence on giving no more than half
time to the “business nobody knows” implied a lack of unmitigated
devotion to his profession, although in all other respects he was o.k.
My friend thought his point well taken and departed gracefully.

Pete had to fire over a third of his staff as the depression deepened,
and it bothered him. The civilization had put him on the spot, and it
wasn’t fair, because he was still only a bright sophomore. His ambition,
his emulative obligation to himself, to his parents, to his classmates,
and later to a growing family, had never permitted him to achieve the
intellectual maturity which he secretly craved. What was he to do with
these stock-market-ruined surplus executives, these debt-burdened copy
writers—Smith’s wife was going to have a baby, Robinson had
tuberculosis, etc., etc. Pete stalled, compromised, whittled, made
private unadvertised loans out of his own pocket, and in the end had to
fire most of them anyway.

Pete fought hard. To hold the business. To get new business. But he was
on the spot there, too. Pete was ethical, a power for “truth in
advertising,” and as sincere about it as practical business
considerations would permit. His agency turned out quantities of bunk,
of course. But respectable bunk. No bought-and-paid-for testimonials.
None of the gaudier and dirtier patent medicine accounts. His
fastidiousness cost him money and work. He had to prove that it was
possible to match the achievements of the testimonial advertisers by
using other, more ethical advertising methods. It wasn’t easy, and
sometimes the ethical distinction between Pete’s methods and those of
the testimonial racketeers seemed a bit tenuous. Particularly now that
the depression had forced advertisers to become increasingly
hard-boiled.

So Pete wasn’t happy. He had worked terribly hard all his life. He was
moral. He had even cut out liquor so that he could work harder. After
failing and succeeding, failing and succeeding, half a dozen times, that
million dollars which he desired with such nai’ve emotional abandon was,
in 1929, almost within his grasp. But the stock market crash had
postponed the realization of that ambition indefinitely. And now the
iron collar of economics—Ely’s, Veblen’s, somebody’s—economics was not
only choking him, driving down his standard of living, brushing aside
his pecuniary ambitions, but forcing him to be an advertising faker, a
slave driver, a hard-boiled executant of decisions written in red ink
and passed by vote of his board of directors.

It wasn’t fair and Pete suffered. There he was, grimacing like the
gargoyle outside his skyscraper office, chilled by the winds of panic
that swept the country, watching the waters of prosperity recede, taking
with them first his profits, and now threatening the very continuance of
his profession. A tough spot. Out on the end of a limb. The buzz of the
Brain Trust in Washington worried him. Would they saw off the limb on
which he was sitting? But that would be outrageous! He was a hard,
competent worker. And a good fellow. He had fought like hell in behalf
of his employees. He had resisted the onslaughts of the advertising
vandals who were destroying reader-confidence. Economics? Damn
economics! Where did he get off in this beautiful American economic
scheme of things? And when would he get a little sleep?

You can see how hard it is to find effigies to burn, bad men to drive
out of office. I don’t blame Pete. I blame the American university for
spawning so many sophomores, telling them that advertising was a
respectable career for an honest, intelligent person, and then walking
out on them as soon as the depression proved that the reverend
professors of “economics” were just as imbecile as any village socialist
had always said they were....No, it’s no use blaming the university
either. Let’s blame Alexander Hamilton a good deal and Thomas Jefferson,
too. And John Calvin. And Daniel Shays for not being as good a
revolutionary engineer as Lenin....

I guess that let’s Pete out. If I were Commissar in a Soviet America—and
I can think of few people less competent for the job—I should want Pete
at a desk around the corner. I’d have to watch him for a while because
he has a considerable will-to-power. But he’s a good fellow, and, given
something serious to do, a good workman. The depression has matured him.
He isn’t a sophomore any more. But there he is, holding the bag for a
staff of two hundred people, underpaying them and overworking them
because he has to, and occasionally obliged, for business reasons, to
strike those ^ophomoric attitudes he no longer believes in. Pete is
still one of the Kings of Bedlam. I think some nights he prays for a
revolution.

### BROADWAY IS SHOCKED

A few years ago there came into an agency where I was working a tall
Westerner who had got himself a job in the publicity department. (Yes,
advertising agencies have publicity departments. They are quite
legitimate, although the newspapers don’t like them much.)

His name was—call him Buck McMaster. He looked like a cowboy and had
been one in his youth in Oklahoma. He was a competent, facile
newspaperman and likable. The job paid more than most newspaper jobs and
it was easy. The smaller newspapers had to like the stuff and even the
desk men on the big ones were trained to say maybe, without meaning
maybe. The stuff had to tie up with the news, of course, and it had to
be competently written. But Big Business is news, and that agency was
doing jobs for Big Business. It was pap for Buck, even though they
loaded his desk with plenty of assignments.

He was happy as a lark at first. But within a couple of weeks that
cowboy was riding high and grabbing for the carriage of his typewriter.
Looking through the glass of my cubicle I could see him, scowling. And
from time to time I would hear him rip spoiled drafts out of his machine
and crunch them into the waste basket.

“Jesus Christ,” he would bleat. “Holy Mother, what next?”

At that time some of my signed writings were appearing in radical
magazines. He must have read something of mine and decided I was safe.

Late one afternoon he came into my cubicle and sat down.

“I’m going gaga,” he said. “This stuff is terrible. Do you mind telling
me—” he leaned forward and whispered—“is this a racket, too?”

I was startled. Newspapermen are supposed to be hardboiled. And this one
was an ex-cowboy to boot, who looked tough enough for anything.

“Do you mind telling me,” I asked, “What was your last job?”

“Sure,” he said. “I was publicity man for———.” He named one of the most
salacious of the Broadway producers. “It was a lousy job—you know, cheap
and nasty. I’d heard about the advertising business and decided to get
into something decent.”

He seemed hurt when I laughed.

“Well,” he said morosely. “Then I guess it’s back to the bright lights
for me. I suppose you don’t happen to know of anything in this town a
man can do and keep his self-respect?”

Buck got out finally by writing cheap fiction for the pulps. He was and
is a lot better than that. He has written honest, sensitive fiction
stories which he hasn’t been able to sell. So he writes more pulp
fiction and is forever spoiling his business by writing it too well. He
lives in the country now, and has got himself elected justice of the
peace in his township. He’s an honest judge, although he tells me the
local political pressures are considerable. He has a considerable local
reputation among the young people. When a couple arrives at his house,
wanting to get married, he first strives earnestly to dissuade them. If
he is over-ruled, he then leads them to an idyllic spot beside a brook
and reads them the Song of Solomon. Finally, he refuses to accept a fee.

### PURE GOLD

There is a very scared man huddled back of his desk in a big Western
agency. He is one of the most gifted literary craftsmen I know. He is
something of a sophisticate, and I am confident has never believed a
word of the millions of words of advertising copy he must have written.
But he rarely says anything like that, even when drunk.

He is very scared. He is in his late fifties now, and has six children.
He is very eminent and successful, but he is scared just the same. As
the depression deepened, he saw to it that the people in his department
who stayed could be counted upon to protect his job. Just before the
bank holiday he put ten thousand dollars in gold coins in his safe
deposit box. Every now and then he would go in and make sure that the
gold was still there.

Mr. Gentroy. The brilliant Gentroy. Once he had literary ambitions. But
he was scared. And he is old now. A little of his light red hair is
still left. His face is red, too. When you ask him something he never
commits himself. And when you listen to him, you wonder who or what is
speaking.

There was something there once. A person. Possibly an artist. It is gone
now. For years he has been following Mr. Goode’s prescription: he has
been turning people into gold. Now he is gold himself. Pure gold. Only
occasionally, when he is drunk, does a small bubble of laughter or anger
rise to the surface. The refining process is never quite complete. But
Gentroy, because he was so scared, has carried it farther than most.
Gold. Pure gold.

### POSTURE

Bodfish had asked the doctor about liquor, and the doctor had shrugged.
Bodfish had a leaky heart—the diagnosis was positive on that point. Yet
when Bodfish had asked him about liquor, the very Jewish, very eminent
and very expensive diagnostician had looked out of the window, lowered
his Oriental eyelids, and shrugged.

So Bodfish had gone directly from the doctor’s office to the speakeasy.
In half an hour he was jolly. An hour later the Good Kid came in and
told him cheerfully that he was tight. He hadn’t felt tight. On the
contrary, he felt himself to be the center of an immense, serene and
sober clarity. The experience was not unknown to him. The creative
moment. It was his ability to experience such moments that made him a
great advertising man. He had felt this way the night he had thought of
the Blisterine idea, which had revolutionized the advertising of
proprietary medicines. A sense of power, of marching analysis, of
kaleidoscopic syllogisms resolving into simple, original and utterly
right conclusions.

The sensation was similar, but this time his relaxed, athletic mind was
exploring strange territory. Himself. His life. The curious, strained,
phantasmagoric pattern of his days.

There was something he had wanted to tell the Good Kid, but she wouldn’t
listen. He had felt a beautiful, paternal pity for the Good Kid. It
wasn’t her fault, he had tried to tell her. It wasn’t his fault, either.
They were both victims. As he said it, he had put forth a hand, the
wrist hairy, the flesh around the knuckles showing the first withering
of age, and attempted to lay it upon her brow in a gesture of chaste
absolution.

The Good Kid had laughed at him. “You’re drunk, B. J.” she had assured
him briskly. And a little later she had gone off with the art director,
leaving him alone in the speakeasy in a corner facing the mirror.

The lamps of the speakeasy were heavily shaded. But there was light—the
mood of revelation persisted. It was as if his flashing mind played
against the mirror, and in that clear illumination the face of Bodfish
stared out at him in sharp relief. There were two Bodfishes now. There
was Bodfish, the ad-man, posing, gesticulating in the mirror. And there
was a new, masterful, illuminated Bodfish who smiled sardonically,
fingered his cigar, and continued the inquisition of that
Mephistophelian physician.

“Do you want the truth?” the physician had asked, and Bodfish had said
he did.

Now, with the patient caught in the relentless reflection of the mirror,
Bodfish repeated the question.

“Do you want the truth?”

The lips in the mirror smiled. The head nodded. Yes, it was to be the
truth.

“Your posture is bad, Bodfish. Stand up!”

Bodfish stood up.

“Your nose is six inches ahead of your body. You’re ahead of yourself.”

The face in the mirror smiled deprecatingly. Bodfish’s associates had
frequently made that flattering complaint. Bodfish was too bright. He
thought too fast. His mind was so active that———

“Nonsense, Bodfish. I doubt very much that you have ever in your life
experienced the discipline of honest thought. That head and shoulder
posture what does it remind you of?”

The face in the mirror smirked.

“A hawk? Really, if I am to do anything for you, well have to dispense
with a few of these bizarre illusions. There are hawks in your business,
but not many of them. As it happens a number of my patients are
advertising men. Most of them are like yourself. Have you ever watched a
mechanical rabbit run around a race track pursued by whippets?”

The doctor hadn’t said that—not quite. But being something of a
histrion, as well as a good deal of a masochist, Bodfish enjoyed
exaggerating and refining the cruelties of the diagnosis.

“Posture, Bodfish, is not merely a physical thing. Yours is a moral, a
spiritual disequilibrium. Moreover, you embody, in your own psychic and
physiological predicament, the dilemma of the civilization. Its
acquisitive nose is ahead of its economic body. It is wobbling,
stumbling, about to fall on its face. Throw your chin in, Bodfish.
Think! Do you remember when you first got into the advertising
business?”

Bodfish remembered.

“You were an average youth, Bodfish; perhaps a little more sensitive
than the average, and with a frail talent for writing—not much, but a
little. You had an idea of yourself. It was that idea that held you
together that kept your shoulders back and your chin in. Posture,
Bodfish, is largely a matter of taking thought. You thought a good deal
of yourself in those days. Everything that happened to you mattered. It
mattered to the degree that it affected, favorably or unfavorably, your
idea of yourself. Tell me, Bodfish, in those days did you think of
yourself as a charlatan, a cheat and a liar? Did you think of yourself
as a commissioned maker and wholesaler of half-truths of outright
deceptions; a degraded clown costumed in the burlesque tatters of fake
science, fake art, and fake education, leering, cozening, bullying the
crowd into an obscene tent show that you don’t even own yourself—that by
this time nobody owns?”

The reflected face became distorted as Bodfish advanced upon the mirror.

“Answer me, Bodfish! You wanted me to explain to you why you’ve got a
leaky heart, why your back hurts so you can’t sleep, why none of your
office wives takes you seriously—not after the first week anyway. The
answer is that you’ve not only lost the idea of a society—you’ve lost
the idea of yourself. It’s silly to speak to you as a sick person. As a
person you’ve practically ceased to exist. Long ago you stuffed yourself
into the waste paper basket along with all the other refuse of your
dismal trade. You went down the freight elevator in a big bale, back to
the pulp mill. What’s left is make-believe. Why, you need three gin
fizzes before you can even take yourself seriously. You flap and rattle
like a prewar tin lizzie. And you come to me for repairs! Tell me,
Bodfish, why should any intelligent man waste his time rehabilitating
*you*? Why, you’re as obsolete as a Silurian lizard!...Be sensible,
Bodfish, have a drink.”

Bodfish had a drink.

“To your great profession, Bodfish! To your billion dollar essential
industry! Fill up, Bodfish!”

Bodfish filled his glass.

“To your historic mission, Bodfish, the *reductio ad absurdum* of a
whole era. Drink, Bodfish!”

Bodfish drank.

“To the 40,000 ewe lambs of American advertising, who, as the crisis
deepened, poured out their last full measure of devotion on the altar of
business as usual. To the vicarious sacrifice which history exacts of
the knave, the weakling, and the fantast. Drink, Bodfish!”

At three o’clock in the morning the push-broom of the negro roustabout
encountered an obstruction under the table next the mirror.

“Mistah Tony!”

The proprietor wiped the last glass, placed it carefully on the shelf,
and leisurely emerged from behind the bar.

“Get Joe and put him in the back room,” instructed the proprietor
briefly.

His partner, the ex-chorus girl, returned from padlocking the front
door.

“They tell me he’s lost the Universal Founders account.”

“Yes. His gal friend’s quitting—told me so this evening.”

The proprietor frowned, opened the cash drawer and examined a check.

“Better take him off the list, Clara.”

It was late afternoon of the next day before Bodfish awoke.

He lay quietly staring at the painting of Lake Como on the opposite
wall. Then he closed his eyes. There was something he wanted to remember
something that had happened in the night. What was it? Oh, yes, posture!
That was the word, posture. Marvellous. A big idea. Never been used in
advertising before. Nine out of ten have posture defects.

Sitting up in bed he extracted pencil and an envelope and made hasty
notes. That was it. A cinch. That Universal Founders’ account wasn’t
lost. Not by a damn sight.

He rose, scrubbed briefly at the dirty sink, and inspected himself in
the mirror. Eyes clear. Face rested. Cured!

Great thing, posture. What the doctor ordered.

Bodfish straightened himself. That’s it. Head up. Chin in. Posture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/25-rorty-1934-chapter-twenty-one-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/25-rorty-1934-chapter-twenty-one-original.pdf)</sup>

<sup>*Twenty-first\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>
