**DOI:** 10.21428/3f8575cb.d6ca9e95

<sup>*Twenty-second\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/26-rorty-1934-chapter-twenty-two-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/26-rorty-1934-chapter-twenty-two-original.pdf)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAPTER 22
==========

*GÖTTERDÄMMERUNG: Advertising and the Depression*
-------------------------------------------------

THE evolution of the American salesman hero, climaxed by Mr. Barton’s
deification of the salesman-advertising man in *The Man Nobody Knows*
was rudely interrupted by the stock market crash in 1929. During the
depression years Mr. Barton’s syndicated sermonettes struck more and
more frequently the note of Christian humility. It was an appropriate
attitude. For as the depression deepened it became apparent that the
ad-man could not carry the burden of his own inflated apparatus, let
alone break down the sales-resistance of the breadlines and sell us all
back to prosperity.

The ad-man tried. It is pitiful to recall those recurrent mobilizations
of the forces of advertising, designed to exorcize the specter of a
“psychological depression”: the infantile slogans, “Forward America!”
“Don’t Sell America Short!”; finally, the campaign of President Hoover’s
Organization on Unemployment Relief, to which the publications
contributed free space and the advertising agencies free copy.

One of these advertisements, which appeared in the *Saturday Evening
Post* issue of Oct. 24, 1931, is headed “I’ll see it through if you
will.” It is signed in type “Unemployed, 1931,” and the presumptive
speaker is shown in the illustration: a healthy, well-fed workman,
smiling and tightening his belt. The staggering effrontery of these
frightened ad-men in presuming to speak for the unemployed workers of
America can scarcely be characterized in temperate language. This
campaign signed by Walter S. Gifford, president of the American
Telephone and Telegraph Company, which was at the same time paying
dividends at the expense of the thousands of workers which it had
discharged and continued to discharge, and by Owen D. Young, chairman of
the Committee on Organization of Relief Resources, was designed to kill
two birds with one stone: first, to wheedle money out of the middle
classes, and second, to persuade the unemployed to suffer stoically and
not question the economic, social and ethical assumptions on which our
acquisitive society is based and out of which the eminent gentlemen who
sponsored the campaign were making money. The particular advertisement
already referred to understated the volume of unemployment about a
third, and then the ineffable ad-man, speaking through the masque of the
tailor’s dummy workman said, “I know that’s not your fault, any more
than it is mine.”

It didn’t work. The rich gave absurdly little. And the sales of
advertised products continued to drop despite the pleading, bullying,
snarling editorials printed by the women’s magazines at the urgency of
the business offices which saw their advertising income dropping and
their “books” becoming every week and every month more svelte and
undernourished.

Nothing worked, and pretty soon the ad-men had so much to do, what with
the necessary firing and retrenchment that went on in the agencies and
publications, that they no longer even pretended that they could make
America safe for Hoover by advertising us out of the depression. The
worst of it was that the general public, and even the advertisers quite
evidently didn’t give a whoop about the advertising business—that is to
say, the publisher-broadcaster-agency structure. Thousands of ad-men
were out of work—and the heartless vaudevillians of Broadway sat up
nights thinking up cracks about this unregretted circumstance.

The doctors, the architects, the engineers, even the lawyers were able
to command some public sympathy. But although from 1929 on the consumer
got less and less advertising guidance, stimulus and education, it was
apparent that anybody who had the money had no difficulty in buying
whatever he wanted to buy. So that when apprised of the sad plight of
the ad-men, the unsympathetic layman was likely to couple them with the
bankers and remark in Broadway parlance, “And so what?”

And so the evil days came, and the profession had no pleasure in them.
And the priests of the temple of advertising went about the streets in
snappy suits and tattered underwear. And when they read their *Printers’
Ink* in the public library they encountered some very saddening
statistical trends.

The Advertising Record Company uses a check list of 89 magazines and
gives dollar values, which increased from $190,817,540 in 1927 to
$203,776,077 in 1929. By 1932 the magazine lineage had dropped to
$16,239,587 and the dollar value to $115,342,606. Partial figures for
1933 are provided by *Advertising and Selling*. They show magazine
lineage to be about 29 per cent under the 1932 figures for the first six
months of 1933. In July the descending curve began to flatten, so that,
what with beer and the NRA the September lineage is only minus 5.88 per
cent as against September, 1932—incidentally a reversal of the usual
seasonal trend.

The curve of national advertising in newspapers behaves similarly.
Starting with a dollar value of $220,000,000 in 1925, it reaches a 1929
peak of $260,000,000. Then it drops to $230,000,000 in 1930,
$205,000,000 in 1931, and $160,000,000 in 1932. The drop continued in
the early months of 1933, but the recovery came sooner and has gone
higher; August newspaper advertising was 23.65 per cent above the same
month of the preceding year.

As might be expected, agriculture is the sore spot of the advertising
economy as it is of the economy in general. The Advertising Record
Company’s figures show a slightly earlier incidence of distress in this
quarter. National advertising in national farm publications faltered
from $11,092,342 in 1929 to $10,327,956 in 1930, dropped suddenly to
$7,775,415 in 1931, and slumped hopelessly in 1932 to $4,921,514.

Radio advertising is unique in that it shows a continuous upward trend
during the depression years up to 1933. The combined figures of the two
major chain systems, National and Columbia, show an increase of
broadcasting expenditures by national advertisers from $18,729,571 in
1929 to $39,106,776 in 1932. But by April of this year radio advertising
was 42.71 per cent under the total for the same month of 1932. A
reversal of this trend is indicated by the August total which is off
only 16.53 per cent as against August, 1932. In spite of their increased
income during the depression, however, the Wonder Boys of radio have
managed somehow to stay in the red—NBC, for example, has yet to pay a
dividend to its common stockholders.

So much for the statistical records of the advertising industry. The
summary is incomplete since it does not include the trade press,
car-cards, outdoor advertising and direct advertising. The trends,
however, have been similar.

The human records during these years of the locust have been even more
depressing. Certainly, the Golden Bowl of advertising is not broken. But
it has been badly cracked, and through that crack has leaked at least
half of the 1929 personnel of the profession and, probably, a bit more
than half of the profession’s 1929 income. This is merely a rough
estimate, since no reliable figures are available. The writer is
indebted to a leading employment agency in the field for the estimates
here given. They are based on considerable evidence plus the best
judgment of an informed observer.

Advertising salaries were, of course, preposterously inflated during the
late New Era. A good run of the mill copy writer got $150 a week,
whereas a newspaper reporter of equal competence would be lucky to get
$50 a week. Practically any competent artist could choose between
starving to death painting good pictures and making from $10,000 to
$50,000 a year painting portraits of branded spinach, pineapple, cheese,
etc., so realistic that the publications in which they were reproduced
had to be kept on ice in order to arrest the normal processes of nature.
(The writer admits that the artists were not solely to blame for this
interesting phenomenom.)

The push-button boys, the high-power advertising executives, the star
agency business getters and publication space salesmen—all these were
similarly inflated as to salaries, and as to their conviction of their
own importance. Executive salaries of $25,000 and $30,000 were common in
1929, and there were even a few $50,000 a year men, not counting the
agency owners. Research directors and merchandizing experts had also
begun to come in on the big money. In some of the larger agencies, an
owlish, ex-academic or pseudoacademic type was in great demand as a
front for the more important clients. These queer birds got from $12,000
to $40,000 a year. They specialized in the higher realms of the
advertising make-believe, being as statistical, psychological,
economico-psychological, statistical-sociological as Polonius himself.
Since there was indeed something rotten in Denmark, and advertising was
distinctly a part of that something, they, too, were pierced by the
sword of the depression and fell squealing behind the arras.

Eheu! Those were the happy days! Where are they now, those Pushers of
the Purple Pen, those pent-housed and limousined “artists,” those
academic prime ministers in their modern dress of double-breasted serge,
those industrial stylists and package designers, those stern, efficient,
young-old, button-pushing High Priests of the Gospel of Advertising?

A few, who didn’t get caught in the stock market, are sitting and
drinking in Majorca, waiting for the waters to subside and the peak of
the advertising Ararat to reappear.

Some are doing subsistence farming in Vermont and elsewhere, with
perhaps a hot dog stand as a side line.

Some of them are on the receiving end of the formula of
salesmen-exploitation which many companies have adopted as a means of
conquering the rigors of the depression. You use your own car and your
own gas trying to sell a new gadget in a territory infested by other
salesmen for the same gadget. In two months you have sold two gadgets
and your commissions amount to $58.75. Your business expense for the
same period amounts to $79.85. That proves you’re a poor salesman.

Some of the savants are back in the fresh-water colleges teaching the
same old stuff about scientific merchandizing to the Young Idea, from
whom they carefully conceal what’s happened, assuming that they know
what’s happened, which is doubtful.

A former copy writer of my acquaintance became business manager of a
radical monthly, on a theoretical salary. Another has gone to
California, where Life is Better, and the climate more suitable for
practicing his former craft of commercial fiction. He wasn’t fired, by
the way. It was merely that he found he had no aptitude for the
brass-knuckled rough and tumble of current advertising practice.

One hears that some of the unemployed poets in advertising are writing
poetry and that some of the unemployed novelists in advertising are
writing novels. Perhaps that is one explanation for the increased
tonnage of manuscripts by which editors, publishers and literary agents
have been inundated.

For the so-called “creative” workers in advertising, the adjustment has
perhaps been a little easier than for the executives, “contact men,”
space salesmen, etc. A relief administrator told the writer about an
advertising man who had presented a difficult problem to her
organization. He needed money to feed his family, but he wouldn’t
surrender his respectable address just off Park Avenue. He still hoped
to get back into the running, had a hundred “leads” and schemes.
Meanwhile, he must look prosperous, since an indigent, unsuccessful
advertising man is a contradiction in terms.

Many of the agencies started firing and cutting right after the stock
market crash. By the fall of 1930 wholesale discharges were frequent.
During the past year the havoc has been appalling. Agencies that
formerly employed six hundred people are operating with about half that
number. In the smaller agencies the staffs have been reduced from 150 to
30, from 30 to 8, from 16 to 4. Salaries have been cut again and again.
In some agencies there have been as many as four successive cuts. They
have hit the higher and middle brackets hardest—particularly the
“creative” staffs. The employment agent already referred to has recently
placed copy writers at $50 and $70 a week who in 1929 were getting
$10,000 and $14,000 a year. Secretaries and stenographers have dropped
from $40 and $303 week to $18 and $15. In the entire agency field there
are perhaps a handful that have refrained from cutting salaries or have
restored cuts when business improved for that particular agency.

Mergers have been numerous during the depression. The earlier trend
toward concentration of the business in the hands of a comparatively few
large agencies has been accelerated. In the process many well-known
names have disappeared from the agency roster.

As to the effect of the weeding-out process on the quality of the
residual agency staffs, it may be said that a percentage of sheer
incompetents has been dropped; that a percentage of incompetents has
been retained because through social or financial connections they
controlled the placing of valuable business; that in general, the trend
has been toward a more rigorous “industrialization” of the business,
with a lower average wage scale, and a progressive narrowing of
responsibility. The residual ad-men tend to be or at least to act
hard-boiled. They do what they are told, and they are told to get and
hold the business by any available means.

Competitive business is war. Advertising is a means by which one
business competes against another business in the same field, or against
all business for a larger share of the consumer’s dollar. The World War
lasted four years. The depression has lasted four years. You would
expect that advertising would become ethically worse under the
increasing stress of competition, and precisely that trend has been
clearly observable. But, as already pointed out, ethical value judgments
are inapplicable under the circumstances. Good advertising is
advertising which promotes the sale of a maximum of goods or services at
a maximum profit for a minimum expense. Bad advertising is advertising
that doesn’t sell or costs too much.

Judged by these criteria, and they are the only permanently operative
criteria, good advertising is testimonial advertising, mendacious
advertising, fear-and-emulation advertising, tabloid balloon-technique
advertising, effective advertising which enables the advertiser to pay
dividends to the widows and orphans who have invested their all in the
stocks of the company. It is precisely this kind of advertising that has
increased and flourished during the depression—this kind and another
kind, namely, price-advertising, which advertising men, including that
ad-man at large, General Hugh S. Johnson, view with great alarm. This
brings us to a consideration of various confused and conflicting aspects
of the New Deal which serve excellently to document the previously set
forth contentions of the writer concerning the nature of the advertising
business, its systematized make-believe, and its strategic position in
the capitalist economy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/26-rorty-1934-chapter-twenty-two-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/26-rorty-1934-chapter-twenty-two-original.pdf)</sup>

<sup>*Twenty-second\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>
