<sup>*First\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>

<sup>[PDF](https://mediastudies.press/masters-voice/4-rorty-1934-chapter-one-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://mediastudies.press/masters-voice/5-rorty-1934-chapter-one-original.pdf)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

CHAPTER 1:
==========

*THE BUSINESS NOBODY KNOWS*
---------------------------

  

THE title of this chapter was chosen, not so much to parody the title of
Mr. Bruce Barton’s widely-read volume of New Testament exegesis, as to
suggest that, in the lack of serious critical study, we really know very
little about advertising: how the phenomenon happened to achieve its
uniquely huge and grotesque dimensions in America; how it has affected
our individual and social psychology as a people; what its role is
likely to be in the present rapidly changing pattern of social and
economic forces. didn’t

The advertising business is quite literally the business nobody knows;
nobody, including, or perhaps more especially, advertising men. As
evidence of this general ignorance, one has only to cite a few of the
misapprehensions which have confused the very few contemporary
economists, sociologists and publicists who have attempted to treat the
subject.

Perhaps the chief of these misapprehensions is that of regarding
advertising as merely the business of preparing and placing
advertisements in the various advertising media: the daily and
periodical press, the mails, the radio, motion picture, car cards,
posters, etc. The error here is that of mistaking a function of the
thing for the thing itself. It would be much more accurate to say that
our daily and periodical press, plus the radio and other lesser media,
are the advertising business. The commercial press is supported
primarily by advertising—roughly the ratio as between advertising income
and subscription and news-stand sales income averages about two to one.
It is quite natural, therefore, that the publishers of newspapers and
magazines should regard their enterprises as *advertising businesses*.
As a matter of fact, every advertising man knows that they do so regard
them and so conduct them. These publishers are business men, responsible
to their stockholders, and their proper and necessary concern is to make
a maximum of profit out of these business properties. They do this by
using our major instruments of social communication, whose free and
disinterested functioning is embodied in the concept of a democracy, to
serve the profit interests of the advertisers who employ and pay them.
Within certain limits they give their readers and listeners the sort of
editorial content which experience proves to be effective in building
circulations and audiences, these to be sold in turn at so much a head
to advertisers. The limits are that regardless of the readers’ or
listeners’ true interests, nothing can be given them which seriously
conflicts with the profit-interests of the advertisers, or of the vested
industrial and financial powers back of these; also nothing can be given
them which seriously conflicts with the use and wont, embodied in law
and custom, of the competitive capitalist economy and culture.

In defining the advertising business it must be remembered also that
newspapers and magazines use paper and ink: a huge bulk of materials, a
ramified complex of services by printers, lithographers, photographers,
etc. Radio uses other categories of materials and services—the whole art
of radio was originally conceived of as a sales device to market radio
transmitters and receiving sets. All these services are necessary to
advertising and advertising is necessary to them. These are also the
advertising business. Surely it is only by examining this business as a
whole that we can expect to understand anything about it.

The second misapprehension is that invidious moral value judgments are
useful in appraising the phenomena. Advertising is merely an instrument
of sales promotion. Good advertising is efficient
advertising—advertising which promotes a maximum of sales for a minimum
of expenditure. Bad advertising is inefficient advertising, advertising
which accomplishes its purpose wastefully or not at all. All advertising
is obviously special pleading. Why should it be considered pertinent or
useful to express surprise and indignation because special pleading,
whether in a court of law, or in the public prints, is habitually
disingenuous, and frequently unscrupulous and deceptive? Yet liberal
social critics, economists and sociologists, have wasted much time
complaining that advertising has “elevated mendacity to the status of a
profession.” The pressure of competition forces advertisers and the
advertising agencies who serve them to become more efficient; to
advertise more efficiently frequently means to advertise more
mendaciously. Do these liberal critics want advertising to be less
efficient? Do they want advertisers to observe standards of ethics,
morals and taste which would, under our existing institutional setup,
result either in depriving stockholders of dividends, or in loading
still heavier costs on the consumer?

There is, of course, a third alternative, which is neither good
advertising nor bad advertising, but no advertising. But that is outside
the present institutional setup. It should be obvious that in the
present (surplus economy) phase of American capitalism, advertising is
an industry no less essential than steel, coal, or electric power. If
one defines advertising as the total apparatus of American publishing
and broadcasting, it is in fact among the twelve greatest industries in
the country. It is, moreover, one of the most strategically placed
industries. Realization of this fact should restrain us from loose talk
about “deflating the advertising business.” How would one go about
organizing “public opinion” for such an enterprise when the instruments
of social communication by which public opinion must be shaped and
organized are themselves the advertising business?

As should be apparent from the foregoing, the writer has only a
qualified interest in “reforming” advertising. Obviously it cannot be
reformed without transforming the whole institutional context of our
civilization. The bias of the writer is frankly in favor of such a
transformation. But the immediate task in this book is one of
description and analysis. Although advertising is forever in the
public’s eye—and in its ear too, now that we have radio—the average
layman confines himself either to applauding the tricks of the ad-man,
or to railing at what he considers to be more or less of a public
nuisance. In neither case does he bother to understand what is being
done to him, who is doing it, and why.

The typical view of an advertisement is that it is a selling
presentation of a product or service, to be judged as “good” or “bad”
depending upon whether the presentation is accurate or inaccurate, fair
or deceptive. But to an advertising man, this seems a very shallow view
of the matter.

Advertising has to do with the shaping of the economic, social, moral
and ethical patterns of the community into serviceable conformity with
the profit-making interests of advertisers and of the advertising
business. Advertising thus becomes a body of doctrine. Veblen defined
advertisements as “doctrinal memoranda,” and the phrase is none the less
precise because of its content of irony. It is particularly applicable
to that steadily increasing proportion of advertising classified as
“inter-industrial advertising“: that is to say, advertising competition
between industries for the consumer’s dollar. What such advertising
boils down to is special pleading, directed at the consumer by vested
property interests, concerning the material, moral and spiritual content
of the Good Life. In this special pleading the editorial contents of the
daily and periodical press, and the sustaining programs of the
broadcasters, are called upon to do their bit, no less manfully, though
less directly than the advertising columns or the sponsor’s sales talk.
Such advertising, as Veblen pointed out, is a lineal descendant of the
“Propaganda of the Faith.” It is a less unified effort, and less
efficient because of the conflicting pressure groups involved; also
because of the disruptive stresses of the underlying economic forces of
our time. Yet it is very similar in purpose and method.

An important point which the writer develops in detail in later chapters
is that advertising is an effect resulting from the unfolding of the
economic processes of modern capitalism, but becomes in turn a cause of
sequential economic and social phenomena. The earlier causal chain is of
course apparent. Mass production necessitated mass distribution which
necessitated mass literacy, mass communication and mass advertising. But
the achieved result, mass advertising, becomes in turn a generating
cause of another sequence. Mass advertising perverts the integrity of
the editor-reader relationship essential to the concept of a democracy.
Advertising doctrine—always remembering that the separation of the
editorial and advertising contents of a modern publication is for the
most part formal rather than actual—is a doctrine of material emulation,
keeping up with the Joneses, conspicuous waste. Mass advertising plus,
of course, the government mail subsidy, makes possible the five-cent
price for national weeklies, the ten- to thirty-five-cent price for
national monthlies. Because of this low price and because of the large
appropriations for circulation-promotion made possible by advertising
income, the number of mass publications and the volume of their
circulation has hugely increased. These huge circulations are maintained
by editorial policies dictated by the requirements of the advertisers.
Such policies vary widely but have certain elements in common. Articles,
fiction, verse, etc., are conceived of as “entertainment.” This means
that controversial subjects are avoided. The contemporary social fact is
not adequately reported, interpreted, or criticized; in fact the run of
commercial magazines and newspapers are extraordinarily empty of social
content. On the positive side, their content, whether fiction, articles
or criticism, is definitely shaped toward the promotion and fixation of
mental and emotional patterns which predispose the reader to an
acceptance of the advertiser’s doctrinal message.

This secondary causal chain therefore runs as follows: Mass advertising
entails the perversion of the editor-reader relationship; it entails
reader-exploitation, cultural malnutrition and stultification.

This situation came to fruition during the period just before, during
and after the war; a period of rapid technical, economic and social
change culminating in the depression of 1929. At precisely the moment in
our history when we needed a maximum of open-minded mobility in public
opinion, we found a maximum of inertia embodied in our instruments of
social communication. Since these have become advertising businesses,
and competition is the life of advertising, they have a vested interest
in maintaining and promoting the competitive acquisitive economy and the
competitive acquisitive social psychology. Both are essential to
advertising, but both are becoming obsolete in the modern world. In
contemporary sociological writing we find only vague and passing
reference to this crucial fact, which is of incalculable influence in
determining the present and future movement of social forces in America.

In later chapters the writer will be found dealing coincidentally with
advertising, propaganda and education. Contemporary liberal criticism
tends to regard these as separate categories, to be separately studied
and evaluated. But in the realm of contemporary fact, no such separation
exists. All three are *instruments of rule*. Our ruling class,
representing the vested interests of business and finance, has primary
access to and control over all these instruments. One supplements the
other and they are frequently used coordinately. Liberal sociologists
would attempt to set up the concept of education, defined as a
disinterested objective effort to release capacity, as a contrasting
opposite to propaganda and advertising. In practice no such clear
apposition obtains, or can obtain, as is in fact acknowledged by some of
our most distinguished contemporary educators.

There is nothing unique, isolate or adventitious about the contemporary
phenomena of advertising. Your ad-man is merely the particular kind of
eccentric cog which the machinery of a competitive acquisitive society
required at a particular moment of its evolution. He is, on the average,
much more intelligent than the average business man, much more
sophisticated, even much more socially minded. But in moving day after
day the little cams and gears that he has to move, he inevitably empties
himself of human qualities. His daily traffic in half-truths and
outright deceptions is subtly and cumulatively degrading. No man can
give his days to barbarous frivolity and live. And ad-men don’t live.
They become dull, resigned, hopeless. Or they become daemonic fantasts
and sadists. They are, in a sense, the intellectuals, the male hetserae
of our American commercial culture. Merciful nature makes some of them
into hale, pink-fleshed, speech-making morons. Others become gray-faced
cynics and are burned out at forty. Some “unlearn hope” and jump out of
high windows. Others become extreme political and social radicals,
either secretly while they are in the business, or openly, after they
have left it.

This, then, is the advertising business. The present volume is merely a
reconnaissance study. In addition to what is indicated by the foregoing,
some technical material is included on the organization and practices of
the various branches of the business. Some attempt is made to answer the
questions: how did it happen that America offered a uniquely favorable
culture-bed for the development of the phenomena described? What are the
foreign equivalents of our American rule-byadvertising? How will
advertising be affected by the present trend toward state capitalism,
organized in the corporative forms of fascism, and how will the social
inertias nourished and defended by advertising condition that trend?

The writer also attempts tentative measurements of the mental levels of
various sections of the American population, using the criteria provided
by our mass and class publications. Advertising men are obliged to make
such measurements as a part of their business; they are frequently
wrong, but since their conclusions are the basis of more or less
successful business practice they are worthy of consideration.

The one conclusion which the writer offers in all seriousness is that
the advertising business is in fact the Business Nobody Knows. The
trails marked out in this volume are brief and crude. It is hoped that
some of our contemporary sociologists may be tempted to clear them a
little further. Although, of course, there is always the chance that the
swift movement of events may eliminate or rather transform that
particular social dilemma, making all such studies academic, even
archaic. In that case it might happen that ad-men would be preserved
chiefly as museum specimens, to an appreciation of which this book might
then serve as a moderately useful guide.

Advertising has, of course, a very ancient history. But since the modern
American phenomenon represents not merely a change in degree but a
change in kind, the chronological tracing of its evolution would be only
confusing. It has seemed better first to survey the contemporary
phenomena in their totality and then present in a later chapter the
limited amount of historical data that seemed necessary and pertinent.
of ethics, morals and taste which would, under our existing
institutional setup, result either in depriving stockholders of
dividends, or in loading still heavier costs on the consumer?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[PDF](https://mediastudies.press/masters-voice/4-rorty-1934-chapter-one-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://mediastudies.press/masters-voice/5-rorty-1934-chapter-one-original.pdf)</sup>

<sup>*First\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>
