<sup>*Third\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/7-rorty-1934-chapter-three-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/7-rorty-1934-chapter-three-original.pdf)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

CHAPTER 3:
==========

*HOW IT WORKS: The Endless Chain of Salesmanship*
-------------------------------------------------

  

THE apparatus of advertising, conceived of as the total apparatus of
daily and periodical publishing, the radio, and, in somewhat different
quality and degree, the movie and formal education, is ramified
interlocking and collusive, but *not unified*. This distinction must be
kept carefully in mind. Most of the residual and fortuitous mercies and
benefits that the public at large derives from the system are traceable
to the fact that the apparatus of advertising is not unified; it
exhibits all the typical conflicts of competitive business under
capitalism plus certain strains and stresses peculiar to itself.

With the system operating at the theoretical maximum of its efficiency,
the sucker, that is to say the consumer, would never get a break. In
practice, of course, he gets a good many breaks: a percentage of
excellent and reasonably priced products, a somewhat higher percentage
of unbiased news, a still higher percentage of good entertainment both
on the air and in the daily and periodical press. He even gets a modicum
of genuine and salutary education—more, or less, depending on his
ability to separate the wheat from the chaff.

No system is perfect and the apparatus of advertising suffers not merely
from human frailty and fallibility but from the lag, leak, and friction
inherent in its design.

The apparatus of advertising is designed to sell products for the
advertiser, and to condition the reflexes of the individual and group
mind favorably with respect to the interests of the advertiser. The
desired end result of the operation of the apparatus is a maximum of
profitable sales in the mass or class market at which the advertising
effort is directed.

But the apparatus itself is made up of a series of selling operations as
between the constituent parts of the system. Each of these parts is
manned by rugged individuals, all bargaining sharply, not merely for
their respective organizations but for themselves. In attempting to
trace this endless chain of selling one wonders where to begin. Perhaps
the advertising agency is as good a starting point as any.

### THE ADVERTISING AGENCY.

The advertising agent was originally a space broker dealing in the white
space that newspapers and periodicals had for sale. He bought space
wholesale from the publishers as cheaply as possible and retailed it for
as much as he could get from advertisers. In the early days he
frequently made a handsome profit—so handsome that the more powerful
publishers at- tempted to stabilize the system by appointing recognized
agents and granting them a commission on such space as they sold to
advertisers. The amount of the commission varied. For the compensation
they delivered a service consisting of selling, credit and collection.
The advertiser planned and wrote his own advertisements and had them set
up and plated; he did his own research, merchandising, and so forth.

But more and more the agent tended to take over these functions. He
dealt with many advertisers and hence was in an excellent position to
become a clearing house of experience. From a seller of white space he
became a producer of advertising. In a comparatively short period of
years the larger national advertisers were placing their advertising
through agents whose functions were the following: planning and
preparing the advertisement in consultation with the sales or
advertising manager of the advertiser; attending to all details of art
purchase, mechanical production, etc.; selection of publication media in
which the advertising campaign would appear; checking the insertions in
these media. "Research," "Merchandizing," etc., were later functions of
the agency, which in the larger agencies today are handled by
well-established departments.

The advertising agency is thus in the somewhat ambiguous position of
being responsible to the advertiser whom he is serving but being paid by
the advertising, publication or other advertising medium, his commission
being based on the volume of the advertiser's expenditure. Objection to
this commission method of agency compensation has been chronic for
years. There are today a few relatively small agencies that operate on a
service fee basis. But the commission method of compensation has
persisted and is a factor in the endless chain of selling that links the
whole advertising apparatus.

Before the agent is entitled to receive commissions from the various
advertising media—magazines, newspapers, radio broadcasters, carcard and
outdoor advertising companies—he must first be "recognized." To secure
recognition he therefore presents to each of these media groups, which
maintain appropriate trade committees for this purpose, evidence that he
is financially responsible and controls the placing of a certain minimum
of advertising business. The first selling job is therefore that of the
agent in "selling" his competence and responsibility to the organized
media.

When recognition is once granted, however, the agent steps into the
buyer's position in respect to the media. His duty is then to his
clients, the advertisers. In return for the commission paid by the media
which has been more or less stabilized at 15 per cent less a two per
cent discount for cash, which is passed on to the client, the agent is
expected to prepare effective advertising, properly co-ordinated with
manufacturing and sales tactics, and place it in the media most
effective for the purpose.

Walk into the lobby of any large advertising agency and you will see
about a dozen bright young men with brief cases waiting to see agency
account executives or media department heads. They are space salesmen.
The brief cases contain lavishly printed and illustrated promotion
booklets which serve as reference texts for the salesmen. Many thousands
of dollars go into the compilation of the data printed in one of these
booklets. In it the publication's advertising manager proves that his
"book" has so many subscribers and is bought at newsstands by so many
people, as attested by the impartial Audit Bureau of Circulations. These
readers are concentrated in such and such areas. They represent an
average annual unit buying power of so much as evidenced by the property
ownership of houses, automobiles, etc., etc. Their devotion to the
publication is evidenced by such and such a turnover of subscribers and
such and such a curve of circulation increase. Their confidence and
response to advertising placed in the publication is evidenced by the
success of advertisers A, B and C, whose campaigns last year proved that
advertising in the Universal Weekly brings inquiries for only so much
per inquiry; furthermore such and such a percentage of these inquiries
were materialized into sales. The Universal Weekly also exercises an
important influence upon dealers. The broadside reproducing his campaign
with which advertiser A circularized the trade, resulted in stocking so
and so many new dealers. The advertising department of the Universal
Weekly also co-operates earnestly with advertisers; in fact staff
representatives of the publication delivered so and so many of these
broadsides, and are even responsible for the addition to the
advertiser's list of so and so many new outlets.

The editorial department of the Universal Weekly is also warmly
co-operative. During the year 1932 the Universal Weekly applied the
editorial pulmotor to its readers' flagging will-to-buy with measurable
success. Note also the "constructive" quality of the articles printed in
the Universal Weekly, that it gives also abundant quality in its fiction
did it not pay Pete Muldoon the highest price ever paid a fictioneer for
a serial?

These promotion booklets constitute an important and greatly neglected
source of economic and sociological data. Moreover, some of them are
honest from start to finish. They had better be, on the whole. The
agency's space buyer is hardboiled. He sees *all* the promotion
booklets. Moreover, he has access to the advertising and sales records
of a variety of clients. He can and does construct his own private pie
charts; he can and occasionally does send his own crew of collegebred
doorbell ringers into the field to find out what sort of people read
what. On the basis of this calculus he says yes or no to the publisher's
representative.... Well, not quite that. The publisher's representative
has also seen the advertiser's advertising manager. And the publisher
himself played golf last week with the Chairman of the Advertiser's
Board. And the wife of the publisher's advertising manager gave a tea
yesterday to the wife of the agency's vice-president who would like to
get into the Colony Club. Also, the space salesman and the agency's
space buyer are both enthusiastic members of the Zeta chapter of Epsilon
Sigma Rho—remember that time we smuggled Prexy's prize pig into the
choir loft?

There are certain other considerations. Agencies select media subject to
the approval of the client. But publishers' representatives are also in
a position to recommend agencies to manufacturers who are about to make
their debut as advertisers or to regular advertisers who are thinking of
changing agencies. Also agency space buyers sometimes change jobs. They
may go to other agencies or become space salesmen themselves. And space
salesmen frequently graduate into agency account executives.

What with one thing and another the agency space buyer is likely to say
yes *and* no—until *all* the data of his calculus is in hand.

It is necessary to sketch this background of intrigue because it is
unquestionably a factor in the traffic of advertising where the stakes
are large and a decision one way or another can readily be justified on
entirely ethical grounds. It is a minor factor. Curiously enough there
is probably less of it in the advertising business than in most other
businesses; much less, for instance than in the movie industry, or in
the field of investment banking. It is indeed puzzling that the ad-man,,
whose stock-in-trade in his relations with the public, is pretty much
bunk, should exhibit, in the internal traffic of the business, a
relatively high standard of personal integrity. Yet the writer is
convinced that this is so, and in later chapters will offer tentative
explanations why this should be so.

The agency-publication-advertiser relation is of course only one loop of
the endless chain of selling. To complete the circuit in detail would
scarcely be useful at this point. The major sequences may be summarized
briefly as follows:

### SERVICES OF SUPPLY.

The raw material of advertising consists of ink, paper, paint,
photographic materials and talk. The techniques involved are too
numerous to list, especially since new techniques are constantly
emerging. In the lobby of the agency swapping cigarettes and gossip with
the space salesmen are regularly to be seen the salesmen representing
advertising's services of supply. They are all there in person or
represented by their salesmen. The printer, the lithographer, the
photographer, the carcard and outdoor advertising companies, the
direct-by-mail house, which is a printing house with much of the
production personnel and equipment -of the agency; the advertising
"novelty" house, a "public relations" expert, a couple of broadcasting
companies and three specimens of radio talent. Also the de luxe young
woman who serves as gobetween in the testimonial racket; also half a
dozen people of both sexes who are looking for jobs. They have heard
that the agency has just captured the Primrose Cheese account.

All told it makes quite a mob. The reception clerk is either gray-haired
and dignified, or young, pretty and amiable. She is busy continuously on
the telephone, glibly translating the account executive's "Nothing
doing" into "Mr. Blotz is *so* sorry. Couldn't you come tomorrow at
about this time?" Eventually most of these salesmen are seen by
somebody. The agency is in the selling business too and can't afford to
upstage anybody. While they are waiting they improve their time by
selling each other. The printer sells the direct-by-mail house
executive; the engraver sells the printer; the lithographer sells the
outdoor advertising representative; the radio talent sells the
broadcaster. Only the testimonial racketeer remains uninterested.
Deciding that there isn’t a profitable date in a carload of these
people, she gives it up and goes home.

### INTRA-MURAL SELLING.

It must be understood that an advertising agency is a loose aggregation
of rugged individuals each of whom is very busy carving out his or her
professional career. This occasions more or less continuous conflict and
confusion. The technique of combat is salesmanship. The movement is the
circular movement of the dance, with alternating tempos of dreamy waltz
and frantic fox-trot. There is much cutting-in and swapping of partners.
Everybody is busy selling everybody else; this entails much weaving from
desk to desk; many prolonged luncheon conferences; many convivial
midnight parties in Bronxville, Great Neck and Montclair. The mulberry
bush around which this dance revolves is known in the trade jargon as
the Billing, that is to say, the total volume of advertising on which
the agency gets commissions. Everybody knows the amount of the
commission and everybody knows or can guess approximately the amount of
the Billing. Hence everybody is constantly doing mental calculations in
which the opposing factors are "How much do I do?" and "How much am I
paid?" The answer never comes out right for anybody. The copy-writer
notes that he writes all the copy on three accounts the total annual
billing on which averages say a million dollars. Fifteen per cent of a
million dollars is $150,000. The copy-writer's salary is $5,000 and this
year no bonus was paid at Christmas time. The discrepancy is obvious.
The copy-writer considers that all the other processes of the agency,
such as art production for which a separate added commission is charged,
media selection, client contact, new business getting, forwarding,
billing and other routine tasks, are just as much overhead and that
there is too damned much of it; also too damned much profit going into
the salaries and dividends received by the heads of the agency. All the
other members of the "creative" staff entertain similar views differing
only in the focus of the particular grievance; whereas the lowly
clerical and mechanical workers are convinced that the agency wouldn't
get paid unless the advertisements got into the newspapers and
magazines. They too have their grievances. The way out for all these
people is salesmanship. Hence everybody sells everybody else; the copy
writer and the art director sell the account executives on the relative
importance of copy *versus* art or art *versus* copy; the research
director sends memoranda up to the top pointing out that it is
impossible to sell shoes without an adequate economic and anatomical
study of feet; the new-business-getter inquires with some acerbity, who
brought this account into the house?

Observing this disorder in the ranks, the heads of the agency are
puzzled and heartsick. They work hard—yes, many of them do work
preposterously hard. Few of them make large fortunes out of the agency
business directly. They give more or less secure employment to hundreds
of people. And in return they get an amount of grouching, chiseling and
intrigue that is positively appalling.

The dance around the mulberry bush grows dreamier and dreamier, or
wilder and wilder. Since the generated energy is centrifugal in nature,
it happens at more or less regular intervals that one of the dancers
furtively leaves the floor and runs across the street with a sprig of
the mulberry bush in his teeth. Panic ensues. A chosen few of the
apostate's intimates follow their leader across the street. If the
mulberry sprig roots and flowers, a new agency is established, the music
strikes up, and a new dance begins around the new mulberry bush.

Meanwhile, in the parent agency a period of stricter discipline is
inaugurated. Disaffected staff members are scared or flattered back into
line. New management devices are introduced, which have as their
objective an improved agency morale. They are selling devices primarily.
The staff is sold on the integrity and fairness of the directing heads;
they are sold on the honor and dignity of the advertising profession;
they are assured that the way to the top is always open; that copy
writers, junior executives, etc., who work hard and keep their eyes off
the clock will be given higher responsibilities, with commensurate
increases in salary. The virtues of the ad-man are industry, alertness
and loyalty, and the greatest of these is loyalty. On the anniversary of
his employment with the agency each employee finds on his desk a white
rose. All are urged to take a greater interest in the business. Monday
morning staff conferences are instituted. A frequent subject of
discussion at such conferences is the obligation, falling on every
ad-man, to believe in what he is selling. How can he sell the public
until he has first sold himself? This would seem a somewhat harsh
requirement, but the reader is asked to believe that a percentage of
ad-men fulfill it quite literally. By a process of self -hypnosis they
become deliriously enthusiastic about whatever they are obliged to sell
at the moment.

Their homes are museums of advertised toothpastes, soaps, antiseptics
and gadgets. From themselves, their wives and their children, they exact
the last full measure of devotion. They are alternately constipated with
new condiments and purged with new laxatives, while their lives are
forever being complicated with new gadgets.

Since accounts change hands frequently, a certain openmindedness of
judgment, and a certain emotional flexibility are parts of the necessary
equipment of the ad-man. He must be prepared at a moment's notice to
forswear toothpaste A and announce undying devotion to toothpaste B; to
rip out a whole line of bathroom equipment and install a new line; to
turn in his McKinley Six for a Hoover Eight, whether he can afford it or
not. His ability to do all these things without any outward evidence of
insincerity is little short of miraculous.

The ad -man is indeed a kind of Candide. His world is the best of all
possible worlds, as the Russians say, every change is good, even for the
worse. For instance, he may work for a small agency and passionately
proclaim the efficiency of the smaller service organization as against
that of the half-dozen mammoths of the business. But let his agency be
merged with one of these mammoths and he will make speech at the ensuing
convention of the joined staffs, in which he declares with tears in his
eyes that this marriage was made in heaven. If, as sometimes happens,
the merger was in fact a shotgun marriage consummated more or less at
the behest of the sheriff, his fervor will be heightened only by this
circumstance, which he will stoutly deny to all and sundry. He is not
consciously lying. He literally believes what he is saying. His is
indeed the faith that passes understanding.

In puzzling over such phenomena, it has occurred to the writer that
there is something feminine about the makeup of your died-in-the-wool
ad-man. This is probably an acquired characteristic, a sort of
industrial hazard, or occupational disease peculiar to the business. The
point will become more clear when it is remembered that the advertising
agency is the scene of frequent accouchements—this is indeed the
business-as-usual of the agency. Your ad-man is continuously either
*enceinte* with big ideas, or nursing their infant helplessness. In this
delicate condition he can scarcely be held intellectually or morally
responsible for his opinions and acts. Behind him is the whole pressure
of the capitalist organism, which must sell or perish.

Hence the ad-man's morning sickness, his tell-tale fits of dizziness
after lunch, his periods of lachrymose sentimentality, his sleepless
vigils after hours, his indifference to considerations of elementary
logic—the charming hysteria, in general, of his high-strung temperament.
Hence his trepidation as he approaches the ultimate ordeal to be
described in the next chapter—the Presentation to the Client.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/7-rorty-1934-chapter-three-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/7-rorty-1934-chapter-three-original.pdf)</sup>

<sup>*Third\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>
