<sup>*Fourth\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/8-rorty-1934-chapter-four-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/8-rorty-1934-chapter-four-original.pdf)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

CHAPTER FOUR:
=============

*PRIMROSE CHEESE: An Advertising Accouchement*
----------------------------------------------

  

### 1. PRELUDE

FROM his window close to the top of one of the minor skyscrapers of the
Grand Central district, Eddie Butts, for two months now, has been
watching the spectral towers of Radio City climb into the western sky.

Eddie Butts sighs. It is after hours, and Eddie is tired. The sigh flies
out the window, wreathes itself jocosely around the topmost tower, and
returns as an ironic, incomprehensible whisper in Eddie’s ear.

Eddie Butts shakes his head like a blind horse troubled by flies. He
must get down to business. He must get out his work-sheet for the next
day. Eddie turns to the dictaphone.

“Follow Schmalz on XYZ schedule stop Have Chapin phone Universal on LHJ
extension stop Call up Hank Prentice stop Ask him how the hell he is
stop Follow Chris on revises BDB layouts stop Call Gene at the Club
\[Gene is getting drunk with a client tonight strictly in line of duty,
and it is standard practice to wake him up at noon of the next day\]
Revise plan for Primrose Cheese stop Lather Lulu a little stop \[Lulu is
the radio prima donna who got miffed at the last Cheery Oats broadcast\]
Organize Vita-pep research stop Follow Mac on Spermentine publicity stop
Tell him to damn well watch his step stop Follow stop Follow stop—err
Stop.”

A telephone is ringing persistently at the other end of the floor.
Probably nothing important some girl friend calling one of the boys in
the checking room. But you can never tell. Eddie’s sense of duty is
strong. He decides not to take a chance.

“Hello... Hello... Who? Oh, hello, Bob. This is Eddie. What’s the
matter? Are you in trouble?... Oh, so I’m in trouble am I?... Go on,
you’re drunk... What’s that? Sure, that’s right. We’re all ready to
shoot. Old Himmelschlussel himself will be on here from Racine, day
after tomorrow, and we give him the works, see? What? Oh, swell. Swell
slant. Swell art. Thought I told you about it. Cheese and beer, cheese
and cigarettes. Cheese for dessert. The continental idea, you know. Put
cheese on the map. Himmelschlussel? No, I’ve never met him. What? Who
says so? Who’s Oscar? Yes? Well, is he sure about that? What? Say, how
soon can you get over here? Sure, bring Oscar. Step on it. I’ll wait for
you."

Eddie Butts’ shoulders sag slightly as he stumbles along the half-lit
corridor back to his office. This might be just a space salesman’s wise
crack. On the other hand, it might be a real one—another fire alarm. In
which case—

Eddie went to the bookcase and took down the three elaborately bound
volumes that represented the agency’s submission on the Primrose Cheese
account.

Vol. I. Section 1. Market analysis, plan, and consumer, copy, (the
layouts are already tacked up on the wall in the conference room)
Section 2. Report of the domestic science Bureau. Section 3.
Merchandizing plan, trade copy, dealer helps.

Vol. II. Report of the Research department.

Volume III. Media analysis and estimates. (This is an oversize volume
composed of charts and hand-lettered captions)

For the layman, a word of explanation is perhaps required at this point.
The submission as listed above involves an investment by the agency of
approximately $10,000. It is a gambling investment, even though in this
instance the client has signed a contract appointing the XYZ company as
his advertising agent, and certain frail safeguards to the agent are
embodied in this contract. It is a gambling investment because all this
work has been done subject to the client’s approval, and most of it be
paid for only when and if the client o.k’s the campaign and the
advertising begins to appear.

In some cases such presentations are sheerly speculative, since they are
made *before* the agent is appointed, as a means of selling the client
and securing the account. Such speculative selling by the agency is
frowned upon by the organized profession and is prohibited in the NRA
agency code of fair competition. There are, of course, many ways of
evading this prohibition, and since the agency field is highly
competitive, such evasions will probably continue, much as in the past.

It may be asked: why this extraordinary and costly elaborateness of
selling? The explanation resides chiefly in the commission method of
compensation. To the client that 15% commission looks like a lot of
money—*is* a lot of money when applied to a total annual expenditure by
the client of, say, $12,000,000 for advertising a single brand of
cigarette.

The economic logic of the situation induces two opposing points of view.
From the agency’s point of view, the client is the squirming,
recalcitrant fly in the otherwise pure ointment of that 15% commission.
All clients are unreasonable in theory and frequently so in fact. In
justice to the agency it should be said that the majority of reputable
agencies strive earnestly to earn their commissions. They work hard and
even in the best of all possible worlds they make big money only by a
lucky break, to be discounted by a succession of bad breaks next year.
But the client either doesn’t know this or doesn’t care. On the
principle of caveat emptor, the client has to be shown.

To put it crudely, the agent, from the advertiser’s point of view, is a
bunk-shooter, a hi-jacker, with whom he is obliged to deal merely
because he has to pay that 15% commission anyway. In its relations to
clients, the agency may be neither a bunk-shooter nor a hi- j acker, but
it is guilty as charged until it proves itself innocent. When possible
the client forces the agency to split the commission; or the advertiser
may finance his own “house agency.” There are arguments against both
these devices. When they seem plausible, recourse is had to other forms
of chiseling. The agency is perhaps asked to pay the salary of the
client’s advertising or sales manager. In any event the client insists
on “service” and lots of it. He demands free research and merchandizing
service, for which the agency would like to charge, and sometimes does
charge an additional fee. He insists on dealing with the principals of
the agency, whether his account is large or small, and irrespective of
the competence of the staff workers assigned to the account. The
advertising manager expects the agency’s art department to design his
Christmas cards and forget to bill him. The advertisers’ statistician
expects the agency’s copy department to find a publisher for the verse
of the Wunkerkind spawned by his sister-in-law. When the advertiser’s
advertising manager, or sales manager, or vice president of the Company,
their wives, cousins, etc., come to New York, they are duly entertained
in more or less Babylonian fashion, depending upon their estimated
importance, and their previously ascertained habits and tastes. The bill
for this entertainment is duly applied to the agency’s overhead on that
particular account.

But the necessitated elements of conspicuous waste are most apparent in
the Presentation to the Client which our friend Eddie Butts, in the
nocturnal solitude of his skyscraper eyrie, is now somewhat morosely
examining.

The service embodied in that presentation must look as if it were worth
at least twice what the client is asked to pay for it, as determined by
15% of the net recommended expenditure for publication, radio, car-card,
poster, direct, and other miscellaneous advertising. In this respect it
is like the presentation of any advertised product to the consumer. The
jar of cold cream worth 8 cents must look as if it were worth the $2.00
that is charged for it. The cheap car must look like an expensive car.
The $1.98 dress must look like a million dollars. All this is what is
known as “psychological” selling, and the principle operates in unbroken
continuity through the whole fabric of the advertising business.

Eddie Butts conducts his examination of the agency’s highly styled and
psychologized product from back to front. The client, when the
presentation is made to him, will proceed similarly, since the nub of
the argument lies in the recommended net expenditure, a figure which
appears inconspicuously at the end of Volume III.

In this case, the figure is only moderate—about $500,000—and as Eddie
Butts, reading from right to left, weaves through the maze of charts,
tables, graphs, copy and merchandizing these, etc., etc., he reflects
ruefully that this presentation not only looks like a million dollars,
but as a matter of fact, it has already cost the agency a good deal more
than it should have cost.

There has been a lot of grief on this account. In the beginning it
dropped into the house more or less out of the blue. Old Hanson came
back from a trip through the Middle West with the contract in his
pocket. Everybody was considerably surprised, since Hanson’s function in
the agency had come to be regarded as almost wholly ornamental. A rather
handsome, gray-haired, middle-aged person, his appearance and manner
suggested extreme probity, conservatism, and a certain wise and
sophisticated benignity. Copy writers, art directors and other
“creative” workers occasionally testified to each other that Hanson was
stupid, and produced more or less convincing evidence to this effect.
But the heads of the agency, being a shade more sophisticated than
either Hanson or his critics, were aware that certain varieties of
handsomely packaged stupidity are not without their uses in the
advertising business. So that Hanson’s position was secure.

But he certainly had pulled a boner on this account. Eddie recalled the
preliminary conference called to consider the problem of Primrose Cheese
and to devise appropriate solutions.

The stenographer’s record listed as among those present Hanson, Butts,
(Eddie was the group director having super-, visory responsibility for
the account) McNear, the art director and Appleton, his young assistant;
Blashfield, the brilliant copy-art-plan man, the outstanding advertising
genius of the Kidd, Kirby & Dougherty Agency; Shean, the copy man, whose
strictly disinterested facility made him a useful understudy for
Blashfield and others; Mrs. Betts, the head of the Domestic Science
Bureau, a rather grandiose, gray-haired personality, full of sex
antagonism and quite without a sense of humor; Harmsworth and Billings,
the last-named being merely a couple of obscure copy hacks.

The day previous to the conference, all these people had received, along
with notice of their mobilization, a sample of Primrose Cheese, with
strict injunction to eat it that evening. It was a large sample, and
Eddie recalled that some of the conferees looked a little the worse for
wear that morning.

In opening the meeting, Eddie made the usual preliminary pep talk, duly
deposited the problem on the long mahogany table, and called for
solutions.

*Mr. Hanson:* Since I am more or less responsible for bringing this
account into the house, perhaps I should tell you some of the
circumstances. Mr. Outerbridge, the advertising manager of the Primrose
Cheese Company, is a college classmate of mine, and it is through him
that the account was secured. The Primrose Cheese Company is one of the
four largest manufacturers of cheese in America. Yet hitherto it has
never advertised its products, except in the grocery trade press. The
reputation of Primrose Cheese with the trade is unexcelled. It is sold
from Coast to Coast and from Maine to Florida. Recently sales have been
declining. The competition of advertised packaged brands has been
steadily eating into their business. They’ve got to advertise. Mr.
Outerbridge is convinced of this. His principal, Mr.—Mr.
Himmelschlussel, President of the Primrose Cheese Company, whom I did
not have the privilege of meeting, is I understand still reluctant. But
he realizes that something has to be done, and he has consented to the
appointment of this agency subject to his approval of our
recommendations. We’ve got a tough selling job on all fronts, gentlemen.
We’ve got the whole job to do: packaging, merchandizing, branding,
pricing, merchandizing the whole works. It’s an old conservative firm
and their credit is Ai. Mrs. Betts is experimenting with Primrose Cheese
and the Research department has already started its work. What we want
today, I take it, is some first class advertising ideas. I have an idea
myself, but I shan’t spring it until I’ve heard from some of the rest of
you.

*Mr. Shean:* What kind of cheese is it?

*Mr. Hanson:* Just good, one hundred per cent American cheese. You ought
to know. You ate some of it, didn’t you?

*Mr. Shean:* Yeah, I did. Will you excuse me a moment. I’ll be right
back.

(Silence)

*Mr. Butts:* Charley, why don’t you start the ball rolling yourself. You
said you had an idea.

*Mr. Hanson:* Very well. I have here, gentlemen, an option signed by the
originator of Mickey and Minnie Mouse. By the terms of this option, it
is understood that in consideration of a payment of one thousand
dollars, which I took the liberty of making on my own responsibility,
both Mickey and Minnie Mouse will positively refrain from writing
testimonials for any other cheese for the next three months. My
recommendation, gentlemen, is that our campaign be based on the
testimonials of Mickey and Minnie Mouse. When anybody says cheese,
what’s the first thing you think of? Mice. Who’s the world’s most famous
mouse? Mickey Mouse. Gentlemen, it’s never been done before, and it’s a
natural. What do you think?

(Silence)

*Mrs. Butts:* What do we need Mickey for? It’s Minnie that runs the
kitchen, isn’t it? Excuse me for a moment, please. I’ll be right back.

(Silence)

*Mr. Billings:* (Who has recently escaped from the copy desk of a
tabloid) Ha!

*Mr. Butts:* Billings, will you stop that obscene cackle?

The stenographer’s record became defective at this point. Eddie’s memory
supplied the details. Harmsworth, Princeton, 1928, who had recently
graduated from the apprentice course of the agency, had also elected
that moment to be brought to bed with a big idea of some sort.
Harmsworth was typical of the class of Unhappy Rich Boys for whom
advertising agencies have been required increasingly to serve as dumping
grounds. He was the nephew of the chairman of the board of Planetary
Founders Corporation. It was rumored that on attaining his majority, he
had inherited three million dollars from his mother. He didn’t have to
work. He played polo rather well, but not well enough to rate any great
distinction in his set. And being a serious minded youth with no vices
and no talents, it was necessary for him to have some occupation, some
rôle in life, to which he could refer in his conversations with Junior
League debutantes. Advertising, a romantic, more or less literary
profession, filled the bill admirably.

Harmsworth got in at nine o’clock every morning and frequently stayed
until six. With the other apprentices, he did his bit on research, which
meant days of hot and heavy footwork in the wilds of Queens and the
Oranges, ringing doorbells, and asking impertinent questions of stolidly
uncooperative housewives.

This was Harmsworth’s first agency conference and his first Big Idea.
Its delivery was complicated by the fact that in moments of great
excitement, Harmsworth stuttered painfully.

*Mr. Harmsworth:* C-c-can’t we t-t-tie this c-campaign up to the n-n-to
the n-n-news? How about hooking it up with relativity? There’s so much
f-f- so much food value in ch-chcheese. Relatively, you know. More f-f
food value than meat. More than eggs. Maybe we could g-g-g-g-maybe we
could get Einstein!

*Mr. Billings* (who is frantically waving two fingers): Excuse me,
please.

*Mr. Butts:* All right, Billings.

*Mr. Harmsworth:* Of course, it may be a b-b- a bum hunch. I just
thought—

(Silence)

By this time the conference was pretty well mired. Something had to be
done, and as usual, Blashfield did it. Blashfield’s salary was thirty
thousand dollars a year, plus his participation as a stockholder in the
agency’s profits. Blashfield didn’t think that was enough. Every day, in
every possible way, he proved it wasn’t enough. Cruelly, sadistically,
he exposed the incompetence, the muddleheadedness of his associates. He
had a string of copy writers and layout men working under him, all of
whom hated him cordially. Their work was rarely used, except as a foil
to exhibit the superior brilliance of the agency’s star copy-art-plan
performer. At the last moment, in a day or two days, he would knock out
the copy, rough layouts, plan and marketing strategy for a whole
campaign. Artists, printers, engravers, the mechanical production staff
of the agency, would be called upon to work nights and Sundays to
complete the job. Blashfield’s overtime bills were notorious.

Then, with the plan memorandum snatched from the stenographer and
flanked by two or three subordinates carrying unwieldy art and other
exhibits, he would lope out of his office, pile into a taxi, and catch
the train for Baltimore just as it was moving out of the station. The
next morning he would lope back into the office, like a half-back
completing an end run, and deposit the okayed plan, copy, layout and
appropriation on Eddie Butts’ desk.

Blashfield had done it again: *his* plan, *his* copy, *his* layouts,
*his* sale. Alone in Baltimore he had dazzled the client with the
coruscations of his wit, the machine gun rattle of his logic, the facile
improvisations of genius answering every objection with pungent phrase
or graphic line. O.K. Now Eddie, it’s up to you to follow it.

From sad experience, Eddie had learned what to do on such occasions. The
first thing to do was to take the train to Baltimore himself and pick up
the pieces. Eddie knew what he would find. He would find a group of
business men experiencing a perfectly dreadful morning after hangover,
and indulging in the usual orgy of remorse and mutual recrimination.

Blashfield had been, shone and conquered. Blashfield was a brilliant
fellow—an advertising genius. Sure, and they hoped to God they never saw
him again. Now about this damned contract they had signed....

Eddie was no genius. As an advertising man he was only mediocre. But as
a fixer he was an expert. Even so, he would be lucky if, after two weeks
of hard work, he emerged with a modified appropriation and a revised
campaign, in which some remnants of Blashfield’s initial performance
might or might not be discernible. The campaign as carried out might be
better or worse than Blashfield’s original. Usually it was worse, for
Blashfield’s competence was genuine enough. But for better or worse it
was duly billed and commissioned, which was the sort of thing the
agency’s treasurer was forever grousing about. So that Eddie Butts’
salary was thirty-five thousand dollars a year, a fact that forever
festered like a thorn in the Achilles’ heel of the agency genius.

Because of the repetition of such experience, the heads of the agency
had increasingly restricted Blashfield’s pyrotechnics to the home
grounds, where he could be carefully watched and protected against
himself. No let-up of the Blashfield drive had resulted, but his hobbled
ego required more and more bloody human sacrifices. His performance at
the Primrose Cheese conference had been sanguinary in the extreme.

Beginning suavely, he had made some incisive remarks about the standards
of agency practice, the nature and purpose of agency conferences.
Abruptly he swung into a disquisition on the natural history and
personal habits of mice; mice that live in old houses but are never
housebroken; old mice, young mice; the love life of the mouse; mother
mice and their pink and squirming progeny; mice and elephants, and the
tactlessness of both as dinner guests; mice that creep out from under
sinks and leer up at horrified housewives; (at this point Mrs. Betts
lifted her skirts and barely suppressed a shriek.) Mice and cheese. The
kind of cheese mice eat, and the obscene sounds they, make while eating;
the dumbness of mice and the dumbness of men.

By this time old Hanson was purple with rage. But before he could
interrupt Blashfield, whom the stenographer had given up trying to
follow, was well launched upon a burlesque of relativity, which rapidly
took form as a convention of mouse domestic science experts, presided
over by Minnie Mouse, and discussing the relative dietetic merits of
meat, cheese, caviar, etc. Even Harmsworth laughed, partly to cover his
confusion.

Then abruptly the wizard’s mood changed. Come on fellows. Let’s be
serious. What’s the best way to sell cheese? Primrose Cheese?

With rapid logic he outlined the campaign that could, should and must be
conducted. The consumption of cheese in America was negligible compared
to its consumption in France, England, Germany, Switzerland—throughout
the world. The dietetic habits of America must be transformed. An
institutional campaign, then? No, a selling campaign, hard-boiled
selling copy that would boost the sales of Primrose Cheese from week to
week and from month to month. But the copy would be educational too. It
would show the things that Americans do eat and drink, and dovetail
cheese into the menu; Primrose Cheese for the cocktail party. Cheese for
dessert the continental idea. That’s what all the best people are doing
and the rest of America must be shamed into imitating the Best People.
Style. Style in the copy. Style in the art. Jean Mazarin for the
art—he’ll be in New York in two weeks and he’ll love it.

Now, as to the trademark that some of you have been worrying about. What
is it? A primrose, crossed with a key. It looks a little like a
swastika, and a little like a Jewish candlestick. But look at it now.

Blashfield executed a few swift strokes on his sketching pad.

There’s your solution. It’s still a little like a swastika, and all the
patriotic Germans will notice it. It’s also a little like a Jewish
candlestick, and all the Jews will notice that. But a second look will
convince anybody that it’s neither one nor the other—and that’s just
fine for everybody.

As usual, Blashfield had swept all before him. The conference broke up
after an assignment of preliminary tasks, all to be executed under his
supervision. The other Big Ideas, of course, were never removed from the
appropriate receptacle into which Blashfield, with surgical dispatch,
had consigned them.

Harmsworth had played polo all the next week, and when he returned was
assigned to a bank account. Hanson had groused for a while. His first
idea in twenty years. And on investigation it proved not to be his idea
after all. It was his secretary’s idea, and for several weeks thereafter
the gossip of the women’s room was enlivened by the lady’s complaints
about how hard it was for a girl to get ahead in a big agency.

The campaign had consumed the time of eight or ten people for three
months. In the end, Blashfield had scrapped their efforts and done the
whole job himself in a last minute orgy of nerve-racking and expensive
nightwork by all and sundry.

Eddie Butts winced as he read a memorandum from the Treasurer,
protesting against so huge a bill for preliminary work on what was after
all, not a major account.

Well, there it was. And now if Bob Niemyer’s steer was right, there
would be hell to pay tomorrow.

Eddie sighed, pushed his dictaphone into the corner, and helped himself
to a shot of the house liquor.

### 2. THE FIRE ALARM

It was close to midnight, and Eddie Butts was in the middle of his third
pipe before Bob Niemyer, the space salesman, and his German friend,
stumbled through the darkened outer office and banged on his door.

They were not drunk; merely very formal and very, very earnest.

“Eddie, meet my friend Oscar Schleiermacher... Thanks, I guess I can
stand another... Eddie, I’m afraid this is serious. Oscar knows what
he’s talking about, and he tells me that the big shot of the Primrose
Cheese Company, Hakenschmidt—

“Himmelschlussel, August B. Himmelschussel,” prompted Oscar.

“All right, Himmelschlussel. Well, as I was saying, I was telling Oscar
about the swell presentation you’d worked up for Primrose
Cheese—naturally he wants a piece of it for his friends on the
Vortschrift—and when I got to the big idea, cheese and beer, cheese and
cigarettes, cheese for the cocktail party, why I’m telling you Oscar
almost passed out. Didn’t you, Oscar?”

Oscar made an eloquent gesture, hitched his chair forward, and drained a
large glass of Scotch at a swallow.

“You see, Eddie, this bird Himmelschlussel runs his own business. And
how! He’s got the o.k. on everything, see? What he says goes. And what
he’s going to say when he sees this campaign of yours won’t even be
funny.”

Mr. Schleiermacher nodded solemnly.

“Er ist ein Herrenhuter. Sein Frau auch.”

“There,” said Bob. “What did I tell you? He’s a Herrenhuter. What’s a
Herrenhuter? That’s what you’re going to find out when old
Himmelschlussel gets an eyeful of that French night club art moderne
Blashfield has cooked up for him. A Herrenhuter is a Fundamentalist,
only worse. Let’s be serious, Eddie. This Himmelschlussel is religious
as all hell. He’s a prohibitionist. Some of his coin goes to the
AntiSaloon League. What’s more, Mrs. Himmelschlussel is one of the big
shots in the Anti-Cigarette League. Nobody that works for Primrose
Cheese can drink, smoke or forget to say his prayers. Isn’t that right,
Oscar?”

“Ach, ja,” said Oscar. “Er ist ein Herrenhuter. Sein Frau auch.”

“His wife too,” said Mr. Niemyer. “So when Oscar gives me the lowdown, I
says to him: ’Eddie Butts has got to know about this. Eddie Butts is a
friend of mine. Eddie and I are just like this’. Y’ get me, Eddie? What
makes it worse, this Himmelschlussel has a bad case of shell shock on
advertising anyway. Ain’t that right, Oscar?

“Schrecklich,” confirmed Oscar with an expansive gesture.

“The story goes like this,” continued Mr. Niemyer. “The local team of
the League wins the pennant, see? And Himmelschlussel, he’s a fan. Sure,
baseball, that’s his only vice. It seems he has a nephew playing
shortstop on the team. That was eight years ago. Well, Old
Himmelschlussel, he’s the proud uncle, and he’s got to do something
about it, see? So what does he do? A big dinner for the team, see? Hell
with expense. Sauerbraten, Kartofelkloss, leberknudel, hasenpfeffer, the
whole works. No beer, no hard liquor. No cigarettes. Cheese. Boy, was
there cheese! Big camembert in the middle of the table. Four feet high,
weighs eighty pounds. Mottoes. Clock works. Imitation dugout. Birdie
pops out of dugout. Cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo—counts the score, see? Fine.
Swell. Cost a lot of money. Only thing is, you know camembert. Eighty
pounds of camembert. Ripe. Not so good. And those bush leaguers thirsty
as camels, and no beer. So they get tough. Bean the birdie with pop
bottles. Raise hell, see? That’s bad enough, but next day the papers get
funny. Himmel(schlussel don’t advertise, see? They keep it up for days.
Himmelschlussel sore. Feelings hurt. You tell him, Oscar. “Were his
feelings hurt?

“Vom herz, Herr Butts. Vom herz. Ach, schrecklich.” Oscar held his head
and rocked in remembered sympathy.

“So Himmelschlussel goes Herrenhuter again, worse than ever. Ten
thousand simoleons that year to the Anti-Saloon League. And no more
advertising stunts. That contract of yours—how his sales manager got
that out of the old man I just can’t imagine, unless they’re in
trouble... What’s that, Eddie. Don’t want to rub it in. Just trying to
do you a favor, see? You and me are pals. As I says to Oscar, I
says—what d’you say, Eddie?”

“I said, Jesus H. Christ!”

Eddie Butts wasn’t listening. The fire alarm had rung. He was busy
hunting numbers in the office telephone directory. Blashfield first.
Damn Blashfield. Damn Hanson. Why hadn’t they found out about this big
shot?

“Thanks, Bob,” said Eddie, as he led his visitors to the elevator. “I’ll
let you know what happens. We got a day and a half. Maybe we can pull
out. Good-night. Good-night, Mr. Schleiermacher, and thanks for the
steer.”

### 3. RESCUE PARTY

After hours. The genius of advertising burns brightest after hours. When
the noise of traffic is stilled, when the stream of office time-servers
has flowed north into the Bronx, east and west under and over the rivers
to be blotted up by the vast and formless spaces of Long Island and
Jersey, light still lingers in the sky-scrapers of the mid-town
district.

Light and vision. Not money alone could buy the devotion of these
weary-eyed night workers. It is something else, something strange,
incredible, miraculous—perhaps a little mad. Is it for beauty that they
burn themselves? For truth? For some great cause? No, it is none of
these. It is like a perverse and blinding discharge of human
electricity, like athletes battling on the gridiron, or soldiers going
over the top.

In the Sargasso pool of quiet, high above the night-stricken city, what
toils, what genuine heart-breaks, what farcical triumphs are
consummated!

From the moment that Eddie Butts turned in the fire alarm, the wheels of
the Kidd, Kirby & Dougherty agency never stopped turning. Blashfield
swooped in from Westchester, worked all night, and when his secretary
came in the next morning, turned over a basketful of new copy for
typing. Eddie Butts’ dictaphone whirred continuously. Tense voices
barked into telephones. Printers, appalled by impossible demands, wailed
in anguish, achieved the impossible, and viciously pyramided the
overtime charges. Layout men never left their drawing boards. Typists
worked in relays. What had taken three months to do must be done again,
but this time in thirty-six hours.

It was done. Miraculously, it was done. Blashfield again. Blashfield the
magnificent. Never was the man so dangerous as when, with his back
against the wall, he was challenged by the impossible. A new Big Idea
had been conceived and was well on the way to birth before he reached
the office. Cheese and pie. New England stuff. Native American. Simple,
homey. The New England grandma. The Southern mammy. To hell with
Mazarin. Tell him, sorry, pay his bill or part of it, and charge it up
to profit and loss. Forsythe is our man. Forsythe, the best buck-eye
artist in America. He’s busy? What of it? I said, get him.

Forsythe performed. Blashfield performed. Clerks, messengers,
typists—everybody performed.

By noon of the scheduled day for the presentation the miracle was
accomplished. Or almost. Typewriters still rattled and savage-lipped
production clerks still yapped into the telephone. One o’clock. No lunch
for anybody. Two o’clock, and the final pages of the revised plan were
bound into the portfolio. Three o’clock, and Himmelschlussel was
expected. Three-fifteen, and no Himmelschlussel. Had something gone
wrong?

Only Colonel Kidd himself Calvin Kidd, author, editor and advertising
man only Colonel Kidd remained calm. Back of his desk a framed motto
proclaimed the solid premise on which his professional imperturbability
was based: “There is somebody wiser than anybody. That somebody is
everybody.” It doesn’t make sense, does it? Sure, that’s just the point.
Calvin Kidd was a mystic. He remained calm. But his associates, some of
whom may have felt that their jobs were at stake, were less philosophic.
At the telephone switchboard, the battery of skilled operators grew
querulous striving to release the tide of out-going calls.
Himmelschlussel. Himmelschlussel! Where in hell is Himmelschlussel?

### 4. THE DELIVERY

It wasn’t Dorothy’s fault. Afterwards, since it didn’t matter—anyway
nothing mattered—everybody acknowledged that you couldn’t fairly pin it
on Dorothy.

Dorothy was the reception clerk, stationed in the lobby of the offices
of Kidd, Kirby & Dougherty, with a pad of forms before her and a
telephone receiver clasped over her lovely blonde hair. Dorothy knew her
role, which was to make quick and accurate judgments and translate them
into action.

So that when the little old man with the umbrella stepped out of the
elevator, she knew instantly what to do. The Primrose Cheese account was
in a jam. A messenger was expected from the printer, bringing revised
proofs. She had been warned to rush him through without delay to Mac in
the mechanical production department. Dorothy spotted him instantly and
beckoned him to the desk. The little old man advanced somewhat
diffidently.

“I am Mr. Himmelschlussel. I—

“From Hazenfuss, yes. You’re just in time. Go right through the side
door and ask for Mac.”

Hazenfuss Brothers was the printing shop which at the stern behest of
Blashfield had performed the current typographical miracle.

The little old man hesitated, but Dorothy, gracious but imperative,
motioned him to the side door.

He vanished into a welter of comptometers, typewriters and proof
presses. Dorothy had just an instant to reflect that she hadn’t seen
this particular messenger before. Also, wasn’t it Hazenfuss that dolled
up their messengers in naval uniforms, so that they all looked like
musical comedy Commodores? This must be a new one. Come to think of it,
he did wear a kind of uniform, too—certainly was a funny old geezer.
Maybe Hazenfuss had thought up a new advertising dodge.

Meanwhile, Mr. Himmelschlussel was still trying to find Mac.
Successively, he was shunted to the shipping room, to the store room
clerk, to the purchasing clerk. Early in the ordeal, Mr. Himmelschlussel
began to lose things. First he lost his umbrella. Then he lost his hat.
Coincidentally with this second disaster, he completely lost his
English.

Alarmed by the clamor of what he took to be a minor riot in the
mechanical production department, Pfeiffer, the office manager, emerged
from his cubicle to see an elderly GermanAmerican gesticulating wildly
in the middle of a circle of bewildered clerks. At intervals, his gray
pompadour bristling, he would make a determined break for one of the
innumerable doors, only to be hauled back by an expostulating clerk.

Fortunately, Pfeiffer spoke German, for by this time Mr. Himmelschlussel
could speak nothing else....

When the perspiring Pfeiffer finally persuaded the long awaited client
to permit himself to be led into the presence of Colonel Kidd himself, a
strange quiet had descended upon the agency. Mr. Himmelschlussel himself
was quiet. He would speak neither English nor German. In response to
Colonel Kidd’s urbanities he merely grunted. Blashfield’s irresistible
wisecracks died unborn upon the desolate air.

Silently, the procession wended to the conference room. In silence, Mr.
Himmelschlussel listened to the reading of the plan. Upon the lavish
exhibit of layouts, charts, proofs, etc., he turned a cold Prussian eye.
Silence.

At last, Mr. Himmelschlussel spoke.

“Gentlemen, I haf joost come from de bank. Business is bad. We haf an
offer from de Universal Foods Corporation to buy Primrose Cheese. It is
a good offer. It is a very good offer. We have accepted that offer.

“Dese”—he gestured indifferently at the decorated walls of the
conference room—“dese iss very pooty pictures. De Universal Foods
people, maybe dey like to look at dem. I am sorry. I got to go now. My
wife and I, we have friends in Brooklyn. Good day, gentlemen.”

In the far corner of the lobby an elderly woman was waiting. She had
been waiting a long time. Dorothy thought she was perhaps a cleaning
woman, or the mother of one of the shipping room boys. She said nothing
and politely resisted Dorothy’s gracious solicitudes. She had the corner
to herself now, and Dorothy noticed that the space salesmen had put out
their cigarettes.

Eventually Mr. Himmelschlussel emerged, escorted by Colonel Kidd. She
put her hand under his arm. They got into the elevator. They went to
Brooklyn...

Again that evening Eddie Butts worked late. He was tired, very tired. He
had missed lunch entirely and it was after seven. Eddie was hungry.
There, on the corner of the desk, was a left-over sample. Cheese.
Primrose Cheese.

Holding the package at arm’s length, Eddie went to the open window. It
took a long time falling. You couldn’t hear it strike, but you could
just barely see the yellow splotch it made on the pavement.

Eddie lingered at the window. Thirty-two stories. Every now and then an
advertising man jumps out of one of those high windows in the Grand
Central district. Usually, it is the follow-up man, the old reliable.
Usually, it is Eddie Butts.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/8-rorty-1934-chapter-four-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/8-rorty-1934-chapter-four-original.pdf)</sup>

<sup>*Fourth\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>
