<sup>*Fifth\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/9-rorty-1934-chapter-five-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/9-rorty-1934-chapter-five-original.pdf)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

CHAPTER 5:
==========

*AS ADVERTISED: The Product of Advertising*
-------------------------------------------

  

THE foregoing fictionized account of what happens in a large advertising
agency will doubtless strike the lay reader as exaggerated. It will be
denounced, more or less sincerely, by advertising men who have lived and
toiled so long on the other side of the Advertising Looking Glass that
the barbarous farce-as-usual of advertising practice has become for them
the only reality, the only “sanity” with which their minds are equipped
to deal.

The account is nevertheless true in every essential respect. The fiction
is no stranger than many of the sober facts set forth elsewhere in this
volume.

We have now to consider what sort of product this advertising mill turns
out. Again, the writer’s inclusions may seem at first thought too
sweeping.

The advertisement itself is the least significant part of this product.
The advertisement is an instrument, a tool, and the ad-man is a
toolmaker. In using these tools the newspapers, magazines and radio
broadcasters become something other than what they are commonly supposed
to be; that is one result. By operating as they must operate, not as
they are supposed to operate, these major instruments of social
communication in turn manufacture products, and these products are the
true end products of the advertising industry.

The most significant product, or result, is the effective dissolution of
practically all local or regional, autonomous or semi-autonomous
cultures based economically on functional processes of production and
exchange and culturally on the ethical, moral and aesthetic content of
such processes. The advertising-manufactured substitute for these
organic cultures is a national, standardized, more or less automatic
mechanism, galvanized chiefly by pecuniary motivations and applying
emulative pressures to all classes of the population.

In England, where the organic culture was older, richer and more
resistant, publicists and educators are more keenly aware of the
significance and potency of advertising, although there the business is
still relatively embryonic, lacking either the scale or the intensity of
the American phenomenon. *Culture and Environment*, by F. R. Leavis and
Denys Thompson, best exhibits the 1933 English awareness of what is
happening, and this excellent book, representing the collaboration of a
literary critic and a schoolmaster will be referred to again in later
chapters. Among English creative writers, D. H. Lawrence seems to have
grasped intuitively almost from the beginning, the nature and causes of
the disintegrative process.

In America, the most impressive testimony, both conscious and
unconscious, to the progressive disintegration of the organic American
culture is contained in the work of Sherwood Anderson. Anderson grew up
in a small Middle Western town during the period when the organic
relation between agriculture and small town craft-industry was being
shattered by the emergent forces of mass production, mass distribution,
and by the pseudoculture which the rapidly expanding apparatus of
advertising manufacture as a mechanical substitute for what it
destroyed. First as a manufacturer and later as an advertising man,
Anderson participated unwillingly in this dual process of destruction
and substitution.

This experience, in the view of the writer, provides the essential clue
to an understanding of Anderson’s verse, short stories and novels. Much
of the brilliant early work was written on the marginal time of an
advertising copy writer employed by a large Chicago agency. It has a
single theme: the passionate rejection of the ad-man’s pseudoculture and
the nostalgic search for the organic culture that was already dead or
dying. Anderson saw that the disintegration and sterilization of the
culture is reflected in the fragmentation and neutering of the
individual. In novel after novel, story after story, we see him
separating the quick from the dead and driving first backward, then
forward, into some terrain more habitable for the human spirit.

The reader will perhaps have been struck by the inhuman, hysterical,
phantasmagoric quality of advertising agency practice as described in
the preceding chapter. This is inevitable. The prime mover of the
advertising mill, the drive for profits, has no concern whatever for
human life. Without organic life itself, the advertising mill is fueled
by the organic cultural life which it disintegrates and consumes, but
does not restore or replace. On cultural as well as on economic grounds
it may be said that this organic social heritage is not inexhaustible.
Hence the advertising mill not only disintegrates and destroys all the
humanity that comes within the sphere of its influence but is
ultimately, like the modern capitalist economy of which it is a part,
self-destructive.

One sees this advertising mill as a coldly whirring turbine whose hum is
so loud, so continuous, so omnipresent that we no longer hear it. Its
force is centrifugal: all warm human life is expelled into the
peripheral darkness where it continues to revolve although the machine
can no longer use this nebula of burned-out dead and dying matter.

At the heart of the machine we see dim figures moving: the sort of
people whom the writer has tried to make real and credible in the
preceding chapter. They rush here and there, fiddling with levers,
filling the grease cups.... They are dead men. Against the blue light
their hands are lifted in queer, stylized gestures. They speak, but what
they say is without human meaning. It is the machine speaking through
them and the sound comes to us like the sound of a phonograph playing a
cracked record, hugely and hoarsely amplified. The lips of the robots
move and we hear: ...“Advertising is the new world force lustily
breeding progress. It is the clarion note of business principle. It is
the bugle call to prosperity. But great force as it is, advertising must
seek all aid from literature and art in order that it may assume that
dignity which is its rightful heritage. Advertising is ... oom-pah!
oom-pah! Under the New Deal good advertising will become more essential
than ever. It will be in a position to help the business executive to
avoid those wasteful and excessive practices in selling which so often
add needless costs to needed products. Good advertising is opposed to
senseless price cutting and to unfair competition. Constructive
sell...oom-pah! oom-pah! No sales policy is permanently beneficial that
has its roots in deception ...oom-pah! oompah! It costs a lot of money
when a community is to be attacked ...oom-pah! oom-pah! Remember that
while a shot-gun makes a lot more noise than a rifle it just messes
things up. Aim the rifle well and you get a nice clean hole ...oom-pah!
oom-pah! The most popular dinner guest in Jerusalem ...oom-pah! oom-pah!
Every occupation has its special satisfactions. The architect and the
builder see the product of their planning take shape in steel and stone.
The surgeon snatches life from the jaws of death. The teacher and the
minister give conviction and power to the things that are unseen. Our
calling is not less significant. We build of imperishable materials, we
who work with words.... All things perish, but the word remains
...oom-pah! oompah! oom-pah! oom-pah! oom-pah! . . .”

They are dead men. Their bones are bakelite. Their blood is water, their
flesh is pallid—yes, prick them and they do not bleed. Their eyes are
veiled and sad or staring and a little mad. From them comes an acrid
odor—they do not notice it, it may be only the ozone discharge of the
machine itself. When you ask them to tell you what they are doing, they
do not know, or at least they cannot tell you. They are voiceless,
indeed, self-less only the machine speaks through them.... Dead men tell
no tales.

Most are like that. But here and there among those dim wraiths is one
who still keeps some semblance of life. An artist, or perhaps one who
would have been a scholar or a scientist but that he has suffered the
spleen of an ill fate. Art and science are strong passions. Most of
these exceptional ones become in time like the others. But they are the
stronger spirits and now and then one of them escapes. They do not like
to talk of what they have seen and done there at the heart of the
machine. They like to pretend that it never happened; that it was a kind
of nightmare, as indeed it was. But when tales are told it is they who
tell them. From time to time Sherwood Anderson has told such tales.
Recently he has begun to tell more of them. They are quite horrible
tales. Artists find it difficult to use this material. The advertising
business is harder to write about than the war. It would perhaps bring
some of the dead back to life if more of such tales were told.

But the machine tenders are not the only dead. Great waves of force
shudder outward from the machine, and more and more this cold electric
force substitutes for the life-force of the people whom the waves
surround and penetrate. They too seem to lose the color and movement of
natural human life. They twitch with little fears and itch with little
greeds. They become nervous, jittery, mechanical. They can no longer
weep with spontaneous tears or rock with spontaneous laughter. They too
become in a sense self -less so that one cannot expect them to be true
to themselves or true to others. The waves which increasingly substitute
for their flagging organic will-to-live the waves have indeed not heard
of this truth. For the prime mover from which the waves come is beyond
good and evil, truth and untruth, and the waves are everywhere. They
speak, these creatures, their lips move, but again it is the machine
speaking through them:

...“He invented the foods shot from guns at the skin you love to touch
but your best friends won’t tell you for three out of five are facing
calendar fear another day of suspense learn to be charming the smart
point of view without cost grandpa said I’ll let you know my health to
Quaker Oats I owe upon my face came long ago the smile that won’t come
off for skin eruptions need not worry you guard your dresses spare your
friends perspiration may cost you both who’d believe they called me
skinny 4 months ago I should think she’d notice it herself in closeups
you can trust Blick’s Velvasheen a better mouthwash at a big saving
isn’t it wonderful how Mary Ellen won the $ 5 ,000 beauty contest and
Mrs. Jones wins her husband back at the foot of my baby’s crib I made a
solemn promise the girl of his dreams but she almost lost him in a month
she didn’t have a trace of constipation reports Dr. David of Paris what
color nails at Newport all shades I’ll lose my job if this keeps up
can’t make a sale can’t even get people to see me I’d better ask the
sales manager what’s holding me back couldn’t take on that man you just
sent me seemed competent but careless about B. O. what a fool she is
takes pains washing a sweater gives no care to her teeth and gums and
she has pink toothbrush Mae West and the big hat she wore in “She Done
Him Wrong” who will be the first to wear it in Chicago if Mona Lisa
could have used these 4 Rosaleen eye beauty aids let’s take a look at
the record toasting frees Lucky Strike cigarettes from throat irritation
William T. Tilden II steady smokers turn to Camels William T. Tilden II
did you hear the French nation decorates Campbell’s soup chef for
sending the finest cooking throughout the civilized world Yeow! let’s
run away to sea travel has its niceties....”

This sub-human or un-human jabberwocky saturates the terrestrial
atmosphere. It pours out of hundreds of thousands of loud speakers from
eight o’clock in the morning until midnight. Doubtless the biologists
will shortly inform us that this transformation of the auditory
environment has caused definite degeneration and malformation of the
average American ear. Certainly the eyes must have been affected, for
the same jabberwocky in print glares from the pages of billions of
copies of magazines and newspapers and other billions of posters,
carcards and mail communications. Is it any wonder that the American
population tends increasingly to speak, think, feel in terms of this
jabberwocky? That the stimuli of art, science, religion are
progressively expelled to the periphery of American life to become
marginal values, cultivated by marginal people on marginal time? That
these marginal people are prevented from exercising their proper and
necessary social functions except by permission of the jabberwock? That
many of them indeed compromise fatally with the creature and translate
what they have to say into its obscene jabberwocky?

Let us not forget that the jabberwock feeds on what it destroys and that
it restores and replaces nothing. It is fueled by the organic
will-to-live of the population, which it calls “buying power.” This
buying power is progressively exhausted—advertising as Veblen pointed
out, is a form of sabotage on production—just as our inorganic resources
of coal, oil and minerals are progressively exhausted. After four
depression years the jabberwock is hungry. It has devoured large
sections of the lower and lower middle classes and expelled their dry
bones, burned clean of their buying power, into the outer darkness.
There the electric breath of the jabberwock still plays on them, but
they are ash and slag. They cannot burn, they cannot feed the machine.
Fifteen million of them are dependent upon relief. Another thirty
million are so lean that they can fuel the jabberwock scarcely at all.
You see them dumped like mail sacks on park benches. You see them
fluttering like autumn leaves, magnetized into thin wavering lines job
lines, bread lines. They sit in chilly rooms listening as before to the
voice of the jabberwock, unwilling to believe that they have been
consumed, discarded. The waves still pulsate and the ash of the great
radio audience still glows a little there is so little other food. What
is the jabberwock saying now? ... “I will share.... Don’t sell America
short.... Forward, America....”

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/9-rorty-1934-chapter-five-msp.pdf)</sup>
<sup>|</sup>
<sup>[ORIGINAL\ PDF](https://github.com/mediastudiespress/singles/raw/master/public_domain/rorty-1934/pdfs/9-rorty-1934-chapter-five-original.pdf)</sup>

<sup>*Fifth\ chapter\ of\ James\ Rorty.*</sup>
<sup>Our\ Master’s\ Voice:\ Advertising*.\ New\ York:\ John\ Day\ Company,\ 1934.*</sup>
